2 Schwarzschild’s letter to Einstein

Letter from K Schwarzschild to A Einstein dated 22 December

1915

The letter is presented in English owing to Professor Roger A. Rydin

Honored Mr. Einstein,
In order to be able to verify your gravitational theory, I have brought
myself nearer to your work on the perihelion of Mercury, and occupied myself
with the problem solved with the First Approximation. Thereby, I found
myself in a state of great confusion. I found for the ﬁrst approximation of
the coeﬃcient gµν other than your solution the following two:

gρσ = −

βxρxσ

r5 + δρσ  β

3r3! ;

g44 = 1

As follows, it had beside your α yet a second term, and the problem was
physically undetermined. From this I made at once by good luck a search
for a full solution. A not too diﬃcult calculation gave the following result:
It gave only a line element, which fulﬁlls your conditions 1) to 4), as well as
ﬁeld- and determinant equations, and at the null point and only in the null
point is singular.

If:

x1 = r cos φ cos θ, x2 = r sin φ cos θ, x3 = r sin θ

R = (r3 + α3)1/3 = r 1 +

1
3

α3

r3 + ...!

then the line element becomes:

ds2 = (cid:18)1 −

γ

R(cid:19) dt2 −

dR2

R(cid:17) − R2(dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2)

(cid:16)1 − γ

R, θ, φ are not “allowed” coordinates, with which one must build the ﬁeld
equations, because they do not have the determinant = 1, however the line
element expresses itself as the best.

13

The equation of the orbit remains exactly as you obtained in the ﬁrst
approximation (11), only one must understand for x not 1/r, but 1/R, which
is a diﬀerence of the order of 10−12, so it has practically the same absolute
validity.

The diﬃculty with the two arbitrary constants α and β, which the First
Approximation gave, resolves itself thereby, that β must have a determined
value of the order of α4 , so as α is given, so will the solution be divergent
by continuation of the approximation.

It is after all the clear meaning of your problem in the best order.
It is an entirely wonderful thing, that from one so abstract an idea comes

out such a conclusive clariﬁcation of the Mercury anomaly.

As you see, it means that the friendly war with me, in which in spite of
your considerable protective ﬁre throughout the terrestrial distance, allows
this stroll in your fantasy land.

14

