IHES/P/02/35

LPT-Orsay-02/14

OUTP-02/06P

hep-th/0206042

June 2002

2
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
3
2

 

 
 

2
v
2
4
0
6
0
2
0
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
X
r
a

EFFECTIVE LAGRANGIANS AND UNIVERSALITY

CLASSES OF NONLINEAR BIGRAVITY

Thibault Damour a1 and Ian I. Kogan2 a,b,c

a IHES, 35 route de Chartres, 91440, Bures-sur-Yvette, France

b Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique, Universit´e de Paris XI, 91405 Orsay C´edex, France
c Theoretical Physics, Department of Physics, Oxford University, 1 Keble Road, Oxford,

OX1 3NP, UK

Abstract

We discuss the fully non-linear formulation of multigravity. The concept of universality
classes of eﬀective Lagrangians describing bigravity, which is the simplest form of multi-
gravity, is introduced. We show that non-linear multigravity theories can naturally arise in
several diﬀerent physical contexts: brane conﬁgurations, certain Kaluza-Klein reductions
and some non-commutative geometry models. The formal and phenomenological aspects of

multigravity (including the problems linked to the linearized theory of massive gravitons)

are brieﬂy discussed.

1damour@ihes.fr
2i.kogan@physics.ox.ac.uk

1

Introduction

One of the most important problems which is facing theoretical physics now is the blending

of the Standard Model (SM) with General Relativity (GR). Whatever way we choose (the

most popular ones nowadays are based on some multidimensional constructions involving

extended objects), nobody doubts that it will deﬁnitely modify physics at short scales. On

the other hand, the current general paradigm is to keep General Relativity unchanged at

large scales, but to add new forms of gravitating matter beyond the Standard Model (dark

matter, dark energy) for explaining pressing astrophysical and cosmological facts such as

galactic rotational curves and the accelerating universe. In the present paper, we consider
an alternative paradigm: a modiﬁcation of General Relativity at large scales as a possible

explanation of some pressing cosmological issues (notably cosmic acceleration).

The modiﬁcation of GR that we are going to consider is linked to the issue of “massive

gravity” (for very light gravitons, with Compton wavelength of cosmological scale). A

generic prediction of multidimensional constructions is the existence of massive gravitons.

In particular, any Kaluza-Klein (KK) model predicts, besides a massless graviton, the

presence of an inﬁnite tower of massive gravitons. However, it seems impossible to use the
tower of massive KK gravitons to modify gravity at large scales. Indeed, its spectrum is

generically regularly spaced (as illustrated on Fig. 1a), so that, even if the ﬁrst mode were

very light (i.e. of cosmological Compton wavelength), there would exist no regime where the

ﬁrst mode (or ﬁrst few modes) would be important, and where one could truncate away the

rest of the tower of massive states. In other words, as soon as the ﬁrst mode is important,

we open the extra KK dimensions (see, however, below). The situation is, however, diﬀerent

in some brane models. In particular, Refs. [1]-[4] discovered the possibility (illustrated in
Fig. 1b or Fig. 1c) of having a hierarchical gap, m1 ≪ m2, between the ﬁrst mode (or
ﬁrst group, or even band, of modes) and the tower of higher modes. This situation, called

multigravity (see [5] for a review and [6] for detailed presentation), makes it possible to

envisage an eﬀective four-dimensional theory which contains only the massless and ultra-
light gravitons and discards the states of mass m ≥ m2. The constructions [1]-[4] predict
see-saw-like spectra, m1 M 1+γ
, with γ interpolating [5] between 0 [1] and 1 [2].
Such spectra are naturally compatible with the phenomenologically interesting situation
where m−1
1

is of cosmological order, while m−1
2

is smaller than the millimetre scale.

Planck ∼ m2+γ

2

So far multigravity was only analyzed in the linearized approximation. The main em-

1

m4
m

3

m

2

m1
0=0m

a)

m

3

m

2

m1 
0=0m

b)

m2

m1 
0

c)

Figure 1: Regular spectrum on (Fig.1 a) versus bigravity (Fig.1 b) or quazi-localized gravity
(Fig. 1 c). The last spectrum is continuous but the ﬁrst band is very narrow in comparison
with the gap between bands.

phasis of this paper is to provide a fully non-linear formulation of multigravity, i.e. to write
down, and analyze, a class of consistent eﬀective four-dimensional Lagrangians, describ-
ing, in some limit, the light-mode truncation of the hierarchical spectra of Figs. 1b or 1c.
Though we shall illustrate below our approach in the context of particular multidimensional

realizations (notably brane models exhibiting multilocalization [1],[7] or quasi-localization

[2], [8], [9]), we view our considerations as concerning a very general phenomenon: the con-

cept of Weakly Coupled Worlds (WCW). The concept of WCW is very simple: one assumes

that there are several Universes (labelled by i = 1, . . . , N), each endowed with its own
metric g(i)µν and set of matter ﬁelds {Φi}, which are coupled only through some mixing
of their gravitational ﬁelds. We require that the theory describing the WCW be near a

point of enhanced symmetry, in the sense that there exists a limit (say as some parameter
λ → 0) where the theory contains N diﬀeomorphism-like symmetries, corresponding to N
massless gravitons. A recent theorem [10] has proven that the only consistent non-linear

2

theory involving N massless gravitons is the sum of N decoupled GR-type actions

S0 =

S[gi, Φi] ,

NXi=1

(1)

(2)

(3)

with (we use the signature − + ++)

S[gi, Φi] =Z d4x√−gi [M 2

i R(gi) − Λi + L(gi, Φi)] .

Therefore, the only consistent action for a theory of worlds coupled only through gravity is
of the form

Stot =

S[gi, Φi] + λ Sint(g1, g2, . . . , gN ) .

NXi=1

When λ → 0, the N worlds are non interacting (which implies that, from the point of view
of any observer in one world, the other worlds have only a meta-physical existence), and the
theory has the enormous symmetry ΠiDiﬀ(i), where each diﬀeomorphism group Diﬀ(i) acts
separately on its own metric g(i)µν and matter ﬁelds {Φi}. In the interacting case, λ 6= 0,
the symmetry of the full action must (again because of the theorem [10]) be reduced to

(at most) one group of diﬀeomorphisms: the diagonal group of common diﬀeomorphisms

transforming all metrics as

δ g(i)

µν = ǫλ ∂λ g(i)

µν + ∂µ ǫλ g(i)

λν + ∂ν ǫλ g(i)

µλ ≡ D(i)

µ ǫν + D(i)

ν ǫµ .

(4)

This symmetry restricts the interaction term λ Sint(g1, . . . , gN ) to depend only on the invari-
ants one can make with several metrics. This even leaves room for extra kinetic terms built
from covariant derivatives such as gµν

µν (such terms do not exist in the case of one

λ g(k)

(i) D(j)

λ g(i)

metric because D(i)

µν ≡ 0). However, in view of the many potential diseases associated to
modiﬁcations of the standard Einsteinian kinetic terms, and in the spirit of describing the
class of interaction terms most relevant at large scales,3 i.e. containing the lowest possible
number of derivatives ( namely zero, as expected from a generalization of the mass terms

that appear in linearized multigravity), we shall only consider ultra-local interaction terms,
i.e.

λ Sint = −µ4Z d4xV(g1(x), . . . , gN (x)) ,

3See Section 2.1 below for further discussion about extra kinetic terms.

(5)

3

where µ is a mass scale (henceforth replacing λ as “small parameter”) and where V is a
scalar density made out of the values of the N metrics at the same “point”. We assume,
for simplicity, that the N weakly coupled worlds “live” on the same abstract manifold,

i.e., in other terms, that one is given a family of (smooth) canonical one-to-one maps:
world(i) → world(j).

The aim of this paper is threefold: (i) to motivate the possibility of the eﬀective action

(3), (5) by considering several diﬀerent speciﬁc models (brane models, Kaluza-Klein mod-

els and non-commutative geometry ideas); (ii) to delineate and parametrize the various

“universality classes” of non-linear multigravity; and (iii) to sketch the main qualitative

consequences of such non-linear multigravity theories and to contrast them with the usual
paradigm of “massless plus massive gravitons” which is based on a linearized approximation.

It should be noted that theories deﬁned by (3), (5) (in the “bigravity” case: N = 2) were

ﬁrst introduced in the seventies [11] as a model for describing a sector of hadronic physics
where a massive spin-2 ﬁeld (the “f meson”, with “Planck mass” Mf ∼ 1 GeV in Eq. (2))
plays a dominant role. It was then called “strong gravity” or the “f -g theory”. Our work not

only proposes to revive, within a new (purely “gravitational”) physical context, this early

proposal, but initiates the task of systematically studying the general phenomenological

consequences of the action (3), (5). The present paper will only brieﬂy sketch the new

physical paradigm following from such actions.

In subsequent papers, we shall discuss

in detail the cosmological consequences of such theories [12], as well as its strong-ﬁeld

phenomenology [13].

2 Universality Classes of Bigravity Eﬀective

Lagrangians

For simplicity, we focus, in this paper, on the case of “bigravity”, i.e. N = 2. Understanding

this case is a prerequisite for understanding the general multigravity case (N > 2). Let us

note also that the bigravity “potentials” that we discuss here can be immediately used in
the general case. Indeed a rather general class of “N-metric potentials” V(g(1), . . . , g(N )),
Eq. (5), is the class containing only “two-metric interactions”: V = Pi6=j V(g(i), g(j)). For
only V =Pi V(g(i), g(i+1)). It is interesting to note that the continuum limit (N → ∞) for

instance, one can deﬁne a “crystal-like” many-world with “nearest neighbour” interactions

some suitable “nearest neighbour” interactions can mimic the propogation of gravity in a

4

higher-dimensional space, i.e. the term R dya4(y)q−g(x, y) [tr(g−1 ∂y g)2 − (tr g−1 ∂y g)2] .

as in (29) below. See [12] for further discussion of this subject.

2.1 Parametrization of invariants

Using, when N = 2, the notation g(1) = gL (for “Left”) and g(2) = gR (for “Right”), and
factoring a conventional “average volume factor” (gL gR)1/4 out of the scalar density V 4,
the generic bigravity action reads

S =Z d4x√−gL(cid:16)M 2
Z d4x√−gR(cid:16)M 2

L R(gL) − ΛL(cid:17) +Z d4x√−gL L(ΦL, gL) +
R R(gR) − ΛR(cid:17) +Z d4x√−gR L(ΦR, gR)
−µ4Z d4x (gR gL)1/4 V (gL, gR) .

(6)

Note that the bigravity action (6) contains 5 dimensionfull parameters: two “Planck masses”
ML and MR, two cosmological constants ΛL, ΛR (with dimensions M 4), and the “coupling
mass scale” µ.

Before proceeding, we note that the mass scale µ, entering Eq. (6), will be treated here

as a constant parameter determining the coupling of the two worlds. However, one should
keep in mind the possibility that it be replaced by a ﬂuctuating ﬁeld. This is suggested,
in particular, by the brane realizations of bigravity where the value of µ depends on the

physical distance between the branes, which is controlled by dilaton/radion ﬁelds. A more
general model where µ → µ(x), and where one adds a kinetic term for µ(x), may play an
important role in addressing crucial cosmological issues (such as inﬂation) in the context

of multigravity theories.

Before we shall proceed further let us make two additional comments

• We shall treat V as a potential here,

as an ultra-local function of gL and
gR. As already mentioned above one could also include extra kinetic terms like
gµνDL,R

gL,R σρ, etc. For example mixed terms like √−gLR(gR) or √−gRR(gL)

R,LDL,R

µ gσρ

i.e.

ν

are of these type. However, let us emphasise again that the fundamental concept of
WCW explored here is that one is required to be near the point of enhanced symmetry

4We could, instead, have factored out of V the other natural symmetric density: √−gL + √−gR.

5

and according to the theorem proven in [10] in this point mixing of diﬀerent metrics

is forbidden. Because of this all higher derivative terms mixing diﬀerent metrics must
be supressed by the small parameter µ4 and enter as µ4f (D2g/M 2). One can see that
in the long-wave limit D2g/M 2 ∼ k2/M 2 << 1 one can neglect their contribution in
comparison with a potential term.

• Let us stress that we did not introduce any direct coupling between the two worlds
exept the indirect one mediated by gravity. It means that all matter which can be
observed by any observer is locally coupled only to one world or the other one. Thus
any local experimental check of the equivalence principle is the same as in the General
Relativity - all locally mutually observable matter moves in the same metric. One
can consider other cases but such a study will be left for future publications.

The common diﬀeomorphism invariance (4) restricts the scalar potential V (gL, gR) en-

tering Eq. (6) to depend only on the invariants of the mixed tensor H ≡ g−1

L gR, i.e.

ν ≡ gµσ
H µ

L gRσν .

In 4 dimensions, there are (because of Cayley’s theorem) only 4 independent scalar invari-

ants which can be made from H. For instance, using a matrix notation for H, one can take
the ﬁrst 4 traces of the powers of the matrix H, say

(7)

(8)

τn ≡ tr(H n) ;

n = 1, 2, 3, 4 .

Let us introduce the 4 eigenvalues λa (a = 0, . . . , 3) of H µ

metric gR with respect to gL. They can be deﬁned either by τn = Σa λn
two metrics in a special bi-orthogonal vierbein ea

µ such that

ν , i.e. the 4 eigenvalues of the
a, or by writing the

µ e0

ν + e1

µ e1

ν + e2

µ e2

ν + e3

µ e3
ν ,

gL
µν = −e0
µ e0

gR
µν = −λ0 e0

ν + λ1 e1

µ e1

ν + λ2 e2

µ e2

ν + λ3 e3

µ e3
ν .

(9)

It is easily seen that, apart from an exceptional case (where two eigenvalues coincide,

and correspond to a null eigenvector), it is generically possible to write Eq. (9), though
maybe with a complex vierbein ea

µ. Indeed, two (but at most two) eigenvalues, say λ0, λ1
(one of which necessarily corresponds to a time-like direction) can become complex. We
shall focus on the case where the 4 eigenvalues λ0, λ1, λ2, λ3 are real and positive. As

6

(10)

(11)

(12)

we shall only deal with symmetric functions of the eigenvalues, this restriction is mainly a
notational convenience which can be relaxed by analytic continuation. It is then convenient
to parametrize the invariants of H = g−1
of H:

L gR by means of the logarithms of the eigenvalues

(the µa’s should not be confused with the mass scale µ4 in front of V ) and to introduce, as
basis of independent scalars, the 4 symmetric polynomials

µa ≡ ln λa ;

λa ≡ eµa ,

σn ≡Xa

µn
a .

With this notation, our ﬁrst result is that the most general (densitized) potential can

be written as

µ4 V(gL, gR) = µ4(gL gR)
where V is an arbitrary function of the 4 σa’s.

1

4 V (σ1, σ2, σ3, σ4) ,

2.2 Universality classes

In the same way as the various mathematical forms of the Landau free energy deﬁne uni-
versality classes of phase transitions, we can deﬁne universality classes of bigravity theories
by considering as equivalent the functions V (σa) leading to (essentially) the same multi-
gravitational phenomenology. As we shall see below and in [12, 13], some of the important
qualitative features of the function V (σa) are: (i) its behaviour near σa → 0, (ii) its be-
haviour when σa → ∞, and (iii) the existence or non-existence of “critical points” where
some derivatives ∂V /∂σa vanish.

As a ﬁrst example of a universality class, we can deﬁne the class of V ’s which reduce (in

ν hν

µ hν

µ − hµ

absence of cosmological constants in (6), i.e. ΛL = ΛR = 0), in the linearized approximation,
to the Pauli-Fierz mass term ∼ hµ
ν. The linearized approximation corresponds
to the particular case where gLµν and gRµν are both near the same ﬂat metric ηµν, i.e.
gLµν = ηµν + hL
µν, with hL ≪ 1 and hR ≪ 1. In this limit the above object
Rν − hµ
H = g−1
Lν (where the indices on hR and hL are raised by ηµν).
It is then seen that the eigenvalues of H are λa ≃ 1 + µa, where µa ≪ 1 are the eigenvalues
of hµ
µν − hL
µν
(see below), one then sees that the Pauli-Fierz mass term ∼ hµ
ν is obtained if the

Lν. With the identiﬁcation of the massive graviton mode hµν as hµν = hR

µν, gRµν = ηµν + hR
ν + hµ

L gR reads H µ

Rν − hµ

ν ≃ δµ

µ − hµ

µ hν

ν hν

7

function V (σa) behaves (modulo a positive factor that can be absorbed in the mass scale
µ4) as

V (σa) ≃ σ2 − σ2

1 =Xa

µ2

a − Xa

µa!2

, when µa → 0 .

(13)

The behaviour (13) near µa → 0 deﬁnes the universality class of “Pauli-Fierz-like” bigravity.
Note that one can imagine a case where the potential V does not have quadratic terms
when µa → 0. In the linearized approximation, one would see two massless gravitons, while
the full theory would contain two interacting metric ﬁeld gL, gR (and only one common
diﬀeomorphism invariance).

As a second example of the concept of universality class, we can deﬁne the class of
potentials V(gL, gR) which are symmetric under the exchange gL ↔ gR. It is easily seen
that under the exchange L ↔ R, the eigenvalues λa get inverted (λa → λ−1
a ) so that
the logarithmic eigenvalues µa change sign: µa → −µa. The class of exchange-symmetric
potentials therefore corresponds to the class of functions V (µa) which are even in the µa’s.
In terms of the σ’s this becomes V (σ1, σ2, σ3, σ4) = V (−σ1, σ2,−σ3, σ4).
depend only on the ﬁrst two invariants σ1 ≡ Pa µa and σ2 = Pa µ2

As a further example of universality class, we can consider the class of functions which
a : V = V (σ1, σ2).
We shall see that this class appears naturally in brane models, and our (preliminary)

investigations suggest that this class might be general enough to describe all the possible
qualitative features of a general bigravity theory.

2.3 Equations of motion

The equations of motion derived from the bigravity action read

2 M 2

2 M 2

L(cid:18)Rµν(gL) −
R(cid:18)Rµν(gR) −

1
2

1
2

gL

µν R(gL)(cid:19) + ΛL gL
µν R(gR)(cid:19) + ΛR gR

gR

µν = tL

µν + T L

µν ,

µν = tR

µν + T R
µν .

(14)

Here T µν

L ≡ 2(−gL)−1/2 δ SL

matter/δ gL

µν denotes the stress-energy tensor of the matter on the

left brane (SL
αβ denotes the eﬀective
stress-energy tensor (as seen on the left brane) associated to the coupling term Sint ≡

matter = R d4x√−gL L(ΦL, gL)), while tµν

L ≡ gµα

L gνβ

L tL

8

−µ4R d4x(gR gL)1/4 V (gL, gR):

tµν
L ≡

2

√−gL

δ Sint(gL, gR)

δ gL
µν

= −2 µ4  gR
gL! 1

4"gµν

L

V
4

+

∂ V (gL, gR)

∂ gL
µν

# .

(15)

The corresponding expressions for the right brane are obtained by the exchange L ↔ R.
For instance

tµν

R = −2 µ4  gL
gR! 1
µν − 1

L(cid:16)RL

# .

∂ V (gL, gR)

4"gµν
µν(cid:17) ≡ 0(cid:17), and the conservation of the material

∂ gR
µν

2 RL gL

(16)

V
4

+

R

µν = 0; when the matter equations of motion are satisﬁed) imply the

The Bianchi identities(cid:16)Dν

energy tensor (Dν

L T L

constraints:

Dν

L tL

µν = 0

and Dν

R tR

µν = 0 .

(17)

Actually these two constraints are not independent because the invariance of Sint under the
unbroken diagonal diﬀeomorphism group implies the identity

√−gLDν
µν + √−gRDν
L tL

R tR

µν ≡ 0 .

The explicit expressions of the derivative terms ∂ V /∂ gL,R
µν

in Eqs. (15), (16) tends to be

rather complicated. However, they acquire a simple form when written in the special
frames with respect to which both gL

µν are diagonalized (such as in Eq. (9)). The

µν and gR

mixed components of tL

µν and tR

particular ea

µ of (9) by arbitrary rescalings ea

µν with respect to any such frame (which can diﬀer from the
La and

µ, because such rescalings leave ta

µ → ζ a ea

ta
Ra invariants) take the simple form: (no summation on the frame index a)

ta
La = −2 µ4 e

Ra = −2 µ4 e− 1
ta

1

4 σ1  V
4 −
4 σ1  V

4

+

∂ V

∂ µa! ,
∂ µa! ,

∂ V

with vanishing of the oﬀ-diagonal components (we recall: σ1 ≡Pb µb).

Here, we considered the scalar potential as a function of the µa’s. If V is given as a

function of the σn’s, Eq. (11), the derivative entering Eqs. (18) takes the explicit:

∂ V (σ1, . . . , σ4)

∂ µa

=

∂ V
∂ σ1

+ 2 µa

+ 3 µ2
a

+ 4 µ3
a

∂ V
∂ σ3

∂ V
∂ σ4

.

∂ V
∂ σ2

9

(18)

(19)

This explicit expression illustrates the third type ((iii)) of universality class mentioned

above: If there exist “critical points” where ∂σ2 V = ∂σ3 V = ∂σ4 V = 0 (without restriction
on ∂σ1 V ), such points give rise to a tµ
Rν with the local “equation of state”
t0
L0 = t1
µν. In some
cases, such critical points can be “ﬁxed points” and can give rise (in the “vacuum case”,

L3 (and similarly for tR), i.e. such that tL

Lν and a tµ

µν ∝ gR

µν ∝ gL

µν and tR

L2 = t3

L1 = t2

i.e.

in absence of “material” T L,R

µν ) to bi-(A)dS solutions of the coupled ﬁeld equations.
Note in this respect that the “perturbative limit” µa = 0 is a critical point in the sense
that ∂µa V = ∂σ1 V , independently of the value of a, so that µa = 0 (i.e. gL
µν) can be
a (perturbative) ﬁxed point of the coupled vacuum equations, corresponding to a bi-(A)dS
solution, if the corresponding (constant) curvature λ (Rµ
equations

Rν) satisﬁes the two

Lν = λ δµ

ν = Rµ

µν = gR

−2 λ M 2

−2 λ M 2

L + ΛL = −2 µ4(cid:20) V
R + ΛR = −2 µ4(cid:20) V

4 − ∂σ1 V(cid:21)µa=0
+ ∂σ1 V(cid:21)µa=0

4

,

.

(20)

In the “Pauli-Fierz” universality class the right-hand sides of Eqs. (20) vanish and one has
the usual relation λ = ΛL/(2 M 2
R). In more general
classes the coupling between the two worlds can modify the usual link between λ and ΛL,R.

L) (with the constraint ΛL/M 2

L = ΛR/M 2

2.4 Single “massive graviton” as a limiting case of bigravity

Let us consider the formal limit MR → ∞ in the action (6) (and the ﬁeld equations
(14)). In this limit the metric gR is (formally) frozen into some given “background” metric
Gµν : gR → G, with Gµν solution of Rµν(G) = λ Gµν, where λ = lim(ΛR/(2 M 2
R)) can be
zero, or can be arranged to take any ﬁxed real value. This leaves us with an action for a
single dynamical metric g ≡ gL of the form

S =Z d4x√−g (M 2

L R(g) − ΛL) − µ4Z d4x (g G)

1

4 V (G−1 g) .

(21)

If V belongs to the Pauli-Fierz universality class, gµν = Gµν is a solution of the equations of
motion (if λ = ΛL/(2 M 2
L)), and the small excitations of gµν around Gµν describe a “massive
graviton” (propagating in an Einstein space). But the behaviour of the large excitations of

gµν are described by the non-linear action (21) instead of the usual quadratic Pauli-Fierz
action.

10

The action (21) is (formally) generally covariant: when g is transformed as (4), the

frozen metric G must also be transformed as δ Gµν = DG

ν ǫµ. These ﬂuctuations
of G (which do not change the background curvature invariants) are playing the same role

µ ǫν + DG

as the Goldstone degrees of freedom in the Higgs mechanism for gauge ﬁelds. In a recent
paper [14] these Goldstone degrees of freedom were discussed for the single AdS4 brane case,
using an holographic description of ﬁve-dimensional gravity in terms of a four-dimensional
CFT, and it was shown that there is indeed a vector ﬁeld which provides extra components
to the graviton.

3 Speciﬁc Examples of Bigravity Eﬀective

Lagrangians

After having discussed general possible structural features of bigravity eﬀective Lagrangians,
we shall consider speciﬁc physical models in which such Lagrangians arise. We consider in

turn: (i) brane models, (ii) Kaluza-Klein models, and (iii) non-commutative-type models.

Beforehand let us note that the work in the seventies that ﬁrst considered bigravity models
did not have any underlying physical models from which they could derive some speciﬁc
potentials V (gL, gR). They made up some non-linear generalizations of the quadratic Pauli-
Fierz mass term. For instance, they particularly considered the one-parameter family of
models with

V (gL, gR) ∝ gR
gL!a

(gL

αµ gL

βν − gL

αβ gL

µν)(gαβ

R − gαβ

L )(gµν

R − gµν
L ) .

(22)

3.1 Brane models

Let us start by brieﬂy recalling why (multi-)brane models naturally give rise to “multi-

gravity”. For more details the reader is advised to look at the original papers, and/or

at reviews such as, [15], [5]. Before explaining how several worlds can be gravitationally

“weakly coupled”, let us recall that the paradigmatic brane example of a separate (gravita-

tionally decoupled) brane world is a Randall-Sundrum (RS) scenario, i.e. a ﬂat 3-brane in

AdS(5), with jump conditions on the brane (coming from an assumed Z2 symmetry) able
to “localize” the 5-dimensional graviton as a massless excitation propagating (as a “surface

wave”) in the vicinity of the brane [16], [17]. Putting the brane at the point y = 0 (where

11

y is the “ﬁfth”, transversal coordinate, and where one requires the Z2 symmetry y → −y),
the background 5-dimensional geometry is (see Fig. 2a)

ds2 = e−2σ(y)ηµνdxµdxν + dy2 = e−2σ(z)hηµνdxµdxν + dz2i .

The warp factor behaves as σ(y) ∼ |y| ∼ ln(1 + |z|). The ﬂuctuations near the background
metric are studied by writing:

The ﬁeld hµν(x, z) is expanded in terms of the graviton and KK plane wave states :

ds2 = e−2σ(z)h(ηµν + hµν(x, z)) dxµdxν + dz2i .
2 σ(cid:17) h(n)

µν (x)Ψn(z) where the exp(cid:16) 3

2 σ(cid:17) factor in the expansion is

hµν(x, z) = P∞

n=0 exp(cid:16) 3

necessary for the functions Ψ(n)(z) to obey an ordinary Schr¨odinger equation:

n−∂2

z + V (z)o Ψn(z) = m2

nΨn(y) .

Here the potential V (z) = (dA/dz)2−d2A/dz2 where A = 3σ(z)/2. Qualitatively it is made
up of an attractive δ-function potential plus a smoothing term (due to the AdS geometry)

that gives the attractive potentials a “volcano” form. An interesting characteristic of this

potential is that it gives rise to a (massless) normalizable zero mode

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

Ψ0(z) = exp[−A(z)] = exp[−

σ(z)]

3
2

One can show (see for details [18] and references therein) that the normalization factor

R dzΨ2

0 =R dz exp[−3σ(z)] also relates the fundamental ﬁve-dimensional mass scale M5 to

the four-dimensional Planck mass Mp, namely M 2

p = M 3

5 R dz exp[−3σ(z)].

One can consider now multibrane conﬁgurations where the warped metric is a bounce
as on Fig. 2b. By analysing the spectrum in this case one can easily see that in the case of
an inﬁnitely large separation between the branes massless gravitons are localized on both
of them. But then, according to basic properties of the Shr¨odinger equation, when the
separation is ﬁnite, the degeneracy between the two massless modes is removed and one
ends up with one massless and one ultralight massive graviton. The prototype model of this
class was the “+−+ bigravity” model [1] with two positive tension ﬂat branes (′′+′′ branes)
separated at the bounce position L1 by one intermediate negative tension ﬂat brane (′′−′′
brane) in an AdS5 bulk. The task of ﬁnding the KK spectrum reduces to a simple quantum

12

e  2σ(y)
-

-  2σ(y)
e

y

0

Z2

a)

0

Z2

L 1

b)

y

L

2

Figure 2: Warped metric for single ﬂat brane (Fig. 2a) and bounce for a two-brane conﬁgu-
ration (Fig. 2b). L2 is the separation between branes and L1 is the position of the bounce.
If L1 ≪ L2 the metric is mostly concentrated on a right brane and if L2 − L1 ≪ L1 then it
is concentrated on the left brane.

mechanical problem. It is simple to see that the model (as every compact model) has a

massless graviton that corresponds to the ground state of the system whose wave function

follows the “warp” factor. Then it is easy to see that (say, for simplicity, in the symmetric

case L2 = 2L1) there should be a state with wave function antisymmetric with respect to
the minimum of the “warp” factor, whose mass splitting from the massless graviton will
be very small compared to the masses of the higher levels. Because the “warp” factor is
exponential the diﬀerence in mass behaviour of the ﬁrst and the rest of the KK states is also
exponential. This allowed for the construction of a linear “bigravity” model in which the
remainder of the KK tower does not aﬀect gravity beyond the millimetre bound. Soon after
this model, other models were discussed. Some of them, for example the “quasi-localized”
GRS model [2] and a more general + − −+ multigravity model [3], [4] also used dynamical
negative tension branes. In other models, like the ++ model with two AdS4 branes [19] (or
the limiting case of one single AdS4 brane when the second one is moved to inﬁnity [20])
or in a six-dimensional case [21], there are no negative tension branes and so no problems

emerge with ghost-like radion states. Models with moving branes in which one also can

get “warped” factors were discussed in [22]-[23]. Finally there is a whole zoo of diﬀerent

models in which one can get modiﬁcation of gravity at large scales.

To be speciﬁc, let us consider the +− + model and let us now derive the fully non-linear
bigravity action it gives rise to in the weak-coupling limit where we keep only the dominant

13

terms in the exponentially small (“tunnelling”) coupling between the two positive tension

branes. We are going to ignore the fact that there is a ghost-like radion ﬁeld due to the

existence of the negative tension brane in this model [24]. Anyway we freeze all dilaton and

radion degrees of freedom.

The action describing the full 5-dimensional conﬁguration is (in units where the ﬁve-

dimensional Planck mass is set to one)

S =Z d4xZ dy √−G"R(G) − Vb −Xi

Vi δ(y − yi)# .

(27)

Here, G denotes the 5-dimensional metric, Vb the bulk cosmological constant, and Vi the
tensions of the branes (the index i takes, in our case, three values corresponding to the three

branes: e.g. V1 = VL > 0, V2 < 0 and V3 = VR > 0). We generalize the linear ﬂuctuation
ansatz (24) by writing the 5-dimensional metric as (µ, ν = 0, 1, 2, 3)

ds2

5 = a2(y) gµν(x, y) dxµ dxν + dy2 ,

(28)

where a2(y) = e−2σ(y) is the background warp factor. We assume here that the degrees

of freedom associated to the ﬂuctuations of: (i) the warp factor (“dilaton”), and (ii) the

distance between the branes (“radions”) are all frozen. The detailed mechanism of how

to do that is not important for us now. For example, one can add extra terms in the

action (27) that give large enough mass terms to these ﬂuctuations (say with submillimeter

Compton wave length) following [25] (of course for those radion ﬁelds which are ghost-like

one has to add tachyonic mass terms). The ﬂuctuations of the mixed components gµy can be

consistently set to zero, because of the Z2 symmetry requirement. Inserting the ansatz (28)
into the action (27) yields, after integration by parts and use of the background equations

of motion for the warp factor (which allow one to dispose of all terms containing y-gradients

of a(y)) the following action for gµν(x, y)

S =Z d4xZ dyq−g(x, y)(cid:26)a2(y) R(g(x, y)) −
(29)
ν = gµσ ∂y gσν. Note that this exact
Here, tr h2−(tr h)2 ≡ hµ
(after freezing the dilaton and the radions) action for the nonlinear dynamics of gµν(x, y)
is still 5-dimensional. Note also that all explicit coupling to the branes have disappeared

a4(y)htr(g−1 ∂y g)2 − (tr g−1 ∂y g)2i(cid:27) .

ν ≡ (g−1 ∂y g)µ

µ)2 where hµ

µ−(hµ

ν hν

1
4

14

(thanks to integration by parts). The crucial feature of (29) for our discussion of an eﬀective

4-dimensional bigravity action is the presence of the warp-factor dependent coeﬃcients
a2(y) and a4(y).

It is the fact that these factors are exponentially localized on the two

positive-tension branes (as shown in Fig. 2b which plots a2(y) = e−2σ(y)) which will allow

for the derivation of an approximate 4-dimensional action. Though Eq. (29) was derived

from an explicit 5-dimensional model, we expect that the general structure of Eq. (29),
namely to have a curvature term with a weight function (here a2(y) dy) which localizes it
on some branes, and a transverse-gradient term which also comes with a similarly localized
weight function (here a4(y) dy), will hold in more general situations, like, for instance, the

6-dimensional model of [21] (which is free from negative tension branes). Probably, in the

latter model, if we assume that the excitations related to gradients in the sixth “angular

type” direction θ are frozen (i.e. massive enough), we shall get an eﬀective action of the

type (29) but, possibly, with weight factors which are somewhat modiﬁed (by the y-varying

volume of the sixth circular dimension). To enhance the generality of our discussion, and

cover such cases, we shall henceforth work with an action of the form (29) but with the
replacements a2(y) → a2(y), a4(y) → a4(y), where a2(y) and a4(y) are two (unrelated)
“weight” functions which are strongly localized around two branes. The generalization to
the case of N branes is obvious. The essential features of a2(y) and a4(y) that will be needed
in the following is that they are both positive and that: (i) a2(y) reaches maxima which
are sharply localized on two branes, while (ii) a−1
4 (y) reaches a sharp maximum somewhere
between the two branes. The crucial point is to realize that these generic conditions imply
the following speciﬁc y-dependence of gµν(x, y): as a function of y, g(y) is nearly constant

everywhere, except in a “transition layer”, located around the minimum of a4(y), where
g(y) has a fast variation with y. In other words g(y) is a smoothed version of a Heaviside
step function: g(y) ≃ g1 θ(y∗ − y) + g2 θ(y − y∗) where y∗ is the location of the minimum of
a4(y) and where g1 and g2 are two diﬀerent asymptotic values (which depend on xµ when
It is this transition-layer behaviour which
putting back everywhere the x-dependence).

allows us to derive an approximate 4-dimensional action for g1(x), g2(x).

To understand intuitively this transition-layer behaviour we can assume that we normal-
4 (y) so that it takes the value a−1

ize a−1
4 (y∗) = 1 at its maximum and then decreases to very
small values as y gets away from y∗ (either way). Let us view the action (29) (with a2 → a2,
a4 → a4) as a “mechanical” Lagrangian for the motion of the particle g, when thinking of
y as being “time”. The “kinetic” terms are the last two terms quadratic in y-derivatives.

15

We then view a4(y) as the “mass” of the g-particle. This mass is of order unity around
y = y∗, and then increases to very large values on both sides. In other words, the g-particle
is extremely “heavy” everywhere away from y∗, and becomes relatively “light” only around
y∗, which makes it clear that g(y) will “move” very little away from y∗, and that all “y-
motion” will take place only around y∗. Another way of seeing that what is important is
to have separate maxima in a2(y) and a−1
4 (y) would be to consider the y-Hamiltonian, (in
terms of the y-momentum π = ∂L/∂(∂y g)) which is of the symbolic form: a2 R + a−1
4 π2.
One can technically analyze the behaviour of g(y) in the transition-layer by zooming on the
exact solution of the only relevant part of the “dynamics” near y = y∗, namely the “kinetic
terms” ∼ a4(∂y g)2 ∼ a−1
4 π2. Note that a2 takes very small values around y∗, so that we
can, in ﬁrst approximation, neglect a2 R with respect to a−1
4 π2. This can be done exactly
by changing the “time variable”. Indeed, in terms of the new “time” t, deﬁned by

the “kinetic” part of the action (29) reads simply

dt ≡ a−1

4 (y) dy ,

Sk = −Z d4x I ,

where

I ≡

1

4Z dtq− det g(t) htr(g−1 ˙g)2 − (tr g−1 ˙g)2i .

Here ˙g ≡ ∂g/∂t, and we leave implicit the x-dependence of g. Actually, (31) does not couple
anymore t- and x-derivatives. Therefore we can solve the equations of motion derived from

(31) separately for each point x, i.e. it is enough to solve (32) at each x. The action (32)
is still a very non-linear action for the t-dynamics of a 4 × 4 matrix gµν(t). However, it
is exactly integrable. This is seen by exploiting the symmetries of I: (i) invariance under

rigid SL(4) transformations of gµν, and (ii) invariance under time translations. Note that

we only have an SL(4) symmetry, and not a GL(4) one because of the presence of det g. In
other words, the action is invariant under gµν → g′
ν gαβ only when det Λ = 1. The
ﬁrst symmetry leads to the traceless mixed tensor constant of motion (in any spacetime

µν = Λα

µ Λβ

dimension D)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

C µ

ν = πµ

ν −

1
D

πσ
σ δµ
ν .

16

Here πµ

ν ≡ gνσ πµσ where πµν is the “momentum” conjugate to gµν, namely

πµν =

δ I
δ ˙gµν

= √−g (K µν − K gµν)

where K µν ≡ gµα gνβ Kαβ with Kαβ = 1

2 ˙gαβ being the usual “second fundamental form”.

The second symmetry leads to the constancy of the “energy”:

E =

1
4

√−g htr(g−1 ˙g)2 − (tr g−1 ˙g)2i = √−g (K µ

ν K ν

µ − K 2) .

Contrary to what happens in the well-known Kasner solutions, we are not restricted here to
the “zero-energy” shell (because of the inﬂuence of the curvature term a2 R which changes
the asymptotic behaviour of g on both sides of the “transition layer” that we are currently
zooming into). This implies that the exact solution gµν(t) is diﬀerent from, and more
complicated than, a Kasner solution.

The exact solution is obtained by decomposing gµν in its determinant (or better w ≡
√− det g) and its unimodular part, say γµν/(− det g)1/D. Eq. (33) simply says that w γ−1 ˙γ

is the constant matrix 2 C µ

ν . This is immediately integrated to the matrix equation

γ(t) = γ(t0) exp 2 CZ t

t0

dt

w(t)! .

To complete the solution for g(t) we need to know how its determinant − det g ≡ w2 depends
on t. This is obtained by combining (33) with (35). This yields a ﬁrst order diﬀerential

equation for w(t):

D − 1
D

˙w2 = c2 − E w ; c2 ≡ tr C 2 = C µ

ν C ν
µ .

In terms of the new parameter

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

where B is a constant of integration we get the solution

x ≡

1

c s D

D − 1

E
2

t − B ,

w =q− det g =

c2
E

(1 − x2) ,

17

(39)

(40)

This allows one to express the matrix g as an explicit function of x:

g(x) = 1 − x2
0! 2
1 − x2

2

c s D − 1

dt
w

dx

D

=

D

1 − x2 .
g(0) exp4s D − 1
1 − x2 ,
ν , i.e. is normalized so that tr bC 2 = 1.

D bCZ x

dx

x0

where the matrix bC is bC µ

ν ≡ c−1 C µ

The above exact solution for g(x), i.e. g(t), using (38), does not seem to involve any

transition-layer behaviour. The transition-layer behaviour appears when we express g in

terms of the original transverse variable y (which is the proper distance orthogonally to the

branes). Indeed, when (qualitatively) integrating Eq. (30) to express t as a function of y, the
sharp maximum of a−1
4 (y) around y∗ means that t(y) behaves essentially as a (smoothed)
step function t(y) ≃ t1 θ(y∗ − y) + t2 θ(y − y∗). Inserting this sharp-transition behaviour
into the smooth solution (g(x(t)) (40) then leads to the announced (smoothed) step-like

behaviour of g(y), with the bonus that we now have in hand the (rather complicated)

precise manner in which g(y) sharply (but smoothly) evolves in the transition region. It

is interesting to make the link between the nonlinear transition of g(x, y) between the two
positive-tension branes (which is a smoothed version of g(x, y) ≃ g1(x) θ(y∗−y)+g2(x) θ(y−
y∗)) and the result of linearized ﬂuctuations which, as recalled above, is expressed as

gµν(x, y) = ηµν + hµν(x, y) with hµν(x, y) = Σn exp(cid:18) 3

2

σ(cid:19) h(n)

µν (x) Ψn(y) .

One indeed ﬁnds, when looking at the explicit results for the various mode functions
Ψn(y) that the ﬁrst two modes (n = 0, 1; corresponding to the massless mode, and the

2 σ(cid:17) and Ψ1(y) ≃ ε(y − y∗) exp(cid:16)− 3
µν (x) + ε(y− y∗) h(1)

lightest mode) behave as Ψ0(y) ≡ exp(cid:16)− 3
2 σ(cid:17) where
ε(x) ≡ sign(x). Keeping only the ﬁrst two modes is then equivalent to considering metric
ﬂuctuations of the form gµν(x, y) ≃ ηµν + h(0)
µν (x), which is fully consistent
with our result for the fully nonlinear metric g(x, y) interpolating between a g1(x) and a
g2(x) through a transition layer. When going beyond the step-function approximation, one
can also check that the nontrivial transition behaviour (40) does also correspond (when lin-
2 σ Ψ1(y) (considered
earized in gµν−ηµν) to a zoom on the (large kℓ) limit of the ﬁrst mode e
as a smoothed version of ε(y−y∗)). Note also that the characteristic width of the transition

3

18

layer is ∆y ∼ k−1, where k is the usual bulk curvature parameter deﬁned such that the
background solution has (∂y σ)2 = k2 (outside the branes), so that σ(y) = k |y − y1| near
brane 1 (and a2(y) = e−2σ = e−2k|y−y1|). There is a clean separation between the transition

layer (around y∗ which is the location of the middle negative-tension brane) and the “lo-
calization layers” (around y1 and y2, i.e. the locations of the two positive-tension branes),
when kℓ ≫ 1, where ℓ denotes the smallest interbrane distance: ℓ = min(L1, L2 − L1); see
Fig. 2b. Because of the exponential dependence of the warp factors (and therefore of a2(y)
and a4(y) in the + − + model), even a moderately large value of kℓ suﬃces to ensure that
the above (nonlinear) transition-layer approximation is valid up to exponentially smaller

corrections.

The exact, nonlinear transition-layer solution (40) interpolates between a certain metric
g1(x) ≡ g(x, y1) on the ﬁrst brane, and another one g2(x) ≡ g(x, y2) on the second brane.
Instead of viewing the exact solution (40) as the solution of a Cauchy problem (e.g. for given

g1 and ˙g1), we should reexpress it as the solution of a “Lagrange-Feynman” problem, i.e. as
the unique extremizing solution of the action (31), (32), for given “initial” and “ﬁnal” values
of g(y): i.e. for given g1(x) ≡ g(x, y1) and g2(x) ≡ g(x, y2). We can also think of (32) as
deﬁning a certain Riemannian metric in the space of metrics gµν. We are then considering
the “geodesic” connecting some given initial point g1 to some given ﬁnal point g2. Let
gg1,g2(y) denote this unique (parametrized) geodesic. The analysis above then leads us to
estimate that a good approximation (when kℓ ≫ 1) to the eﬀective action describing the
dynamics of g1(x) and g2(x) is obtained by inserting the “geodesic” gg1,g2(x, y) (computed

for each point x) in the original full action (29), so that

S [g1, g2] =Z d4xL[g1, g2] ,

(41)

(42)

where (suppressing the x-dependence to focus on the y-dependence)

L[g1, g2] = 2Z y2

y1

dy a2(y) R[gg1,g2(y)] − 2I[g1, g2] ,

where R[g] ≡ √−g R(g), and where I[g1, g2] is the value of the “geodesic” action (32)

evaluated for the extremizing solution gg1,g2(y) and integrated between y1 and y2. The

factors 2 in (42) come from the fact that we are assuming periodicity over y varying between
y1 and 2y2− y1. Calculating I[g1, g2] from the exact solution (40) is somewhat complicated.

19

Let us only give the ﬁnal result (which is simpler than the necessary intermediate steps):

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

where

with

I[g1, g2] = (g1 g2)

4 Vb(g1, g2) ,

1

Vb(g1, g2) =

8
T

D − 1

D

(cosh β − cosh α)

y1

T =Z y2
dt =Z y2
D − 1sσ2 −
4s D

σ2
1
D

1

y1

β =

a−1
4 (y) dy ,

=

1

4s D
D − 1

√

bσ2 ,

α =

σ1 .

1
4

γ−1

a where µa denote the logarithms of the eigenvalues of the
1 g2 and σ2 = tr (ln g−1

As above, σ1 ≡ Σa µa, σ2 ≡ Σa µ2
matrix g−1
1 g2, i.e. σ1 = tr ln g−1
1 g2)2. The combination bσ2 is Σabµ2
where bµa ≡ µa − σ1/D denote the logarithms of the eigenvalues of the unimodular metric
1 γ2, i.e. bσ2 = tr (ln γ−1
T =R dt needed to interpolate between g1 and g2. We recall that, in the + − + model, we

1 γ2)2. For added generality, we have left the dependence upon the
brane (spacetime) dimension, though we have in mind here only D = 4. The weak-coupling

parameter appearing in front of the interaction term I is the inverse of the total “t-time”

have a4 = a4. An explicit computation then yields

a

This exponentially large value (due to the exponentially small value of a4 near the inter-

mediate brane) corresponds to the expected exponentially small coupling between the two

metrics on the positive-tension branes.

To get an explicit bigravity action, one still needs to evaluate the ﬁrst contribution in

the Lagrangian (42). Neglecting exponentially small fractional contribution it is clear (in

view of the localized behaviour of a2(y) and of the near y-constancy of gg1,g2(y) outside of

the transition-layer) that this contribution is well approximated by replacing gg1,g2(y) by

its (relevant) boundary value g1 or g2. Finally, the full brane-derived bigravity eﬀective

T =

e4kℓ
2k

.

20

Lagrangian density (in units where the coeﬃcient of R in the higher-dimensional theory is
set to one) is

L(g1, g2) = A1 R(g1) + A2 R(g2) − 2I(g1, g2) ,

where R(g) ≡ √−g R(g), where (see Fig. 2b; we assume that y varies over a full period
[−L2, +L2])

A1 =Z L1

−L1

dy a2(y) , A2 =Z 2L2−L1

L1

dy a2(y) ,

(49)

and where the “potential” term I(g1, g2) is given by Eqs. (43), (44) above.

It is easily checked that the potential (44) has the Pauli-Fierz limiting behaviour (13) in
the limit µa → 0. One can then compute the corresponding Pauli-Fierz mass. One ﬁnds (in
the symmetric case L2 = 2 L1 = 2 ℓ, for simplicity) m2
1 . The explicit value,
in the + − + model, of A1 is A1 ≃ 1/k, so that we get mPF = 2 √2 e−2kℓ k, in agreement

PF = 4 T −1 A−1

with the direct analysis of linearized ﬂuctuations [1]. In the Appendix we further compare

the nonlinear bigravity action to the linearized bigravity results already derived in the
literature. In particular we check that they are fully consistent, even in the asymetric case
L2 6= 2 L1.

A full justiﬁcation of the eﬀective action (42) can, in principle, be obtained by explicitly
considering the eﬀect of corrections to our approximation g(x, y) ≃ gg1,g2(x, y). For instance,
we can write g(y) ≡ gg1,g2(y) + ξ(y) where the correction ξ(y) vanishes, by deﬁnition, when
y = y1 and y = y2. We can then expand ξ(y) = Σn ξn sin 2π n τ (y) where τ ≡ t/T varies
[The condensed notation ξn denotes some ξnµν(x)].
(by deﬁnition) in the interval (0, 1).

An analysis of the full action (expanded quadratically in the ξ’s), containing not only the

“light ﬁelds” g1(x), g2(x), but the tower of “heavy ﬁelds” ξn(x), shows that the mass of
the heavy ﬁelds scale like mξ ∼ e−kℓ k, which is exponentially heavier (by a factor e+kℓ)
than the Pauli-Fierz mass scale. This conﬁrms that the nonlinear bigravity action (42) is a

good eﬀective description when one considers conﬁgurations g1(x), g2(x) where the relevant
gradients are small compared to mξ.

3.2 Kaluza-Klein Models

As said in the Introduction, and sketched in Fig. 1, one expects generic Kaluza-Klein models
to give rise to “regular spectra” containing no gap allowing one to separate a ﬁnite number

21

of light gravitons from an inﬁnite tower of heavy ones. We wish, however, to emphasize the
existence of a class of KK models where such a gap can exist.

D = g(0)

tot = ds2

µν (say g(0)

D + dσ2 where ds2

as a direct (unwarped) product, ds2

By KK model, we mean a higher-dimensional background geometry which decomposes
µν (x) dxµ dxν (with, e.g.,
g(0)
µν (x) = ηµν) and dσ2 = γab(y) dya dyb. When decomposing the ﬂuctuations of the higher-
dimensional metric gM N (x, y) = (gµν, gµa, gab) into representations of the symmetry group
of g(0)

µν = ηµν) one generally expects the squared mass spectrum of tensor (spin
2) ﬂuctuations δ gµν to be given by the spectrum of the scalar Laplacian on the (compact)
internal manifold, say Γ, with metric dσ2 = γab(y) dya dyb. Let λn ≥ 0, with n = 0, 1, 2, . . .
denote the latter spectrum, i.e. γ−1/2 ∂a(γ1/2 γab ∂b) φn(y) = −λn φn(y). There is always
a zero-mode, φ0(y) = const., corresponding to λ0 = 0, i.e. to a massless graviton. The
question of the existence of a hierarchy allowing one to consider, for instance, an eﬀective
theory containing only the massless graviton and a superlight one, is then equivalent to
requiring that the ﬁrst eigenvalue λ1 (or group of eigenvalues) be parametrically smaller than
higher eigenvalues. It is interesting to note that there are general mathematical theorems

which guarantee that such a hierarchy cannot occur if the compact metric γ is Ricci-ﬂat (or

Ricci-positive). Indeed, if we consider, for simplicity, the Ricci-ﬂat case, there are theorems

(see [26], [27]) saying that there exist universal positive constants an(d), bn(d) (which depend
only on the dimension d of the compact manifold Γ) such that an(d) δ−2 < λn < bn(d) δ−2
for all n ≥ 1, where δ denotes the (metric) “diameter” of Γ. However, we wish to emphasize
that, if one does not constraint the sign of the Ricci tensor, nothing prevents the occurrence
of a spectral hierarchy. We conjecture that the generic situation where such a spectral

hierarchy (between a ﬁnite group of abnormally small eigenvalues and the rest) occurs is

a “near pinching” situation, i.e. the case where the manifold Γ is on the verge of getting

split into two (or more) separate manifolds (of the same dimension d as Γ), as is illustrated

in Fig.3a.

We have conﬁrmed by some toy-model calculations that the near-pinching case (if the

connecting “tube” between, say, two manifolds is not too long) does indeed lead to a

spectral hierarchy. Let us also mention that a general theorem of Cheeger (see [28]) can

be viewed as a (moral) conﬁrmation of our conjecture. Indeed, this theorem says that a
lower bound of the ﬁrst eigenvalue is λ1 ≥ h2/4 where Cheeger’s constant h is deﬁned as
the lower bound of the ratio |S|/inf(|Γ1|,|Γ2|) when S runs over all closed submanifolds

22

Γ

a)

Γ
1

Γ
2

b)

Figure 3: Manifold Γ (Fig. 3a) is on the verge of splitting into two classically disconnected
manifolds Γ1 and Γ2 (Fig. 3b). These two manifolds may be connected at the quantum
level.

of Γ (of dimension d − 1) which partition Γ into two open manifolds Γ1, Γ2, with common
boundary ∂Γ1 = ∂Γ2 = S. We use the notation |Γ| to denote the (riemannian) volume of
Γ. Note that h has the dimension of an inverse length, and that “pinching” does indeed
correspond to the case where h → 0.

Physically, we can view the very light mode arising in a nearly pinched conﬁguration
Γ1 ∪ {tube} ∪ Γ2 as coming from the eﬀect of a weak coupling between two “resonators”
(or quantum mechanical systems) having regular spectra λ(1)
n . Before coupling, the
ground state is degenerate, λ(1)
0 = 0. Weak coupling is generally expected to split
this degeneracy into a doublet. As λ0 = 0 is always an exact eigenvalue of the combined
system (corresponding to φ0(y) = 1), this mechanism always leads to a small λ1 (going to
zero with the coupling). Note that the eigenmode corresponding to λ1 is approximately
equal to φ1(y) ≃ ε(y) where ε(y) is +1 over Γ1, and −1 over Γ2.

0 = λ(2)

n , λ(2)

We are aware of the fact that weakly coupled string theory suggests compactiﬁcation

on Ricci-ﬂat manifolds (which exclude a spectral hierarchy). However, we think that string

theory might still, in certain circumstances, allow for a spectral hierarchy: either because of
α′-corrections to Einstein equations (which lead one away from the Ricci-ﬂat case), or (more

speculatively) because of conceivable quantum tunnelling eﬀect between two (separate, but

“near”) Ricci-ﬂat manifolds Γ1, Γ2. Pictorially, such a tunnelling situation is the limit of
Fig. 3b where the link between Γ1 and Γ2 is classically broken. The exponentially small
coupling associated to such a tunnelling situation would naturally induce an exponentially
small λ1, and thereby a bigravity coupling scale µ exponentially smaller than the string
scale.

23

3.3 Bigravity and Connes’ non-commutative geometry

Within his general non-commutative geometry programme [29], Connes introduced the

model of a two-sheeted space X, made from the product of a continuous space Y by
a discrete “two-point space” {a, b} (or Z2) : X = Y × Z2. Though the algebra A of
“functions on X” (deﬁned as the algebra of pairs of functions viewed as diagonal matrices
diag(fa(y), fb(y)) with y ∈ Y ) is commutative, the bimodule of 1-forms on such a space
is not commutative [29]. Generalizations of this model (also based on the product of a

continuum by a discrete space) were used in [30] to give a geometrical explanation of the

structure of the Standard Model. In particular, it was found that the VEV of the Higgs

ﬁeld is related to the (non-commutative) “distance” between the two sheets. The metric

aspect of such a two-sheeted space was developed along diﬀerent lines by several authors

[31], [32], [33], [34]. For instance, Ref. [31] introduced (non-commutative) analogues of the

Riemannian metric, curvature tensor and scalar curvature, which enabled them to introduce
a generalized Einstein-Hilbert action. This generalized Einstein-Hilbert action was found

to contain (besides the standard integral of the scalar curvature of Y ) a minimally coupled
massless scalar ﬁeld σ related to the “distance” between the two sheets by d ∝ e−σ(y).
An alternative approach to studying gravitational eﬀects within general non-commutative

spaces has been proposed in [34]. We shall follow this approach which is based on a general

“spectral action principle”. In its simplest form, this principle is proposing to take as bare

bosonic (Euclidean) action for any non-commutative model X the trace of the heat kernel

associated with the square of the (non-commutative) Dirac operator DX of X:

I = Tr exp (−t D2

X) .

(50)

0

introduces a cut-oﬀ, roughly equivalent to keeping only frequencies smaller

Here t ≡ m−2
than m0. The cut-oﬀ-dependent Euclidean action (50) is viewed (`a la Wilson) as the bare
action at the mass scale ∼ m0.

It seems that all previous works interested in the metric aspect of a two-sheeted space
X = Y × Z2 have restricted themselves (either for simplicity, or because of some constraints
[33]) to the case where the metric is the same on the two sheets. By contrast, we focus
here on the case where the two metrics are diﬀerent, say gL
µν, and the aim of this
subsection is to compute the “potential” V(gL, gR) implied by the spectral action (50).
Following Connes (see p. 569 of the English edition of his book [29]) we deﬁne a Dirac

µν and gR

24

operator on a bi-Riemannian space X = Y × Z2 as

DX =
This operator acts on bi-spinors (cid:16) ψL

D/ L

γ5 m

γ5 m

D/ R

 .

ψR(cid:17) living on Y × Z2. Our conventions are that the

(Euclidean) gamma matrices are hermitian, as well as γ5 (which satisﬁes γ2
5 = 1 and which
anticommutes with the gamma matrices and therefore with the separate Dirac operators

D/ L and D/ R). The explicit form of the (hermitian) Dirac operators on each sheet is

(51)

D/ L,R = i γµ

L,R (∂µ + Ωµ(L, R)) ,

I , γν

{γµ

I } = 2 gµν
I ,

I = L, R .

(52)

aL, γµ

R = γa Eµ

The explicit form of the spin connections Ωµ will not be important for our calculations.
On the other hand, the explicit form of the gamma matrices will be crucial. They read
γµ
L = γa Eµ
aR where {γa, γb} = 2 δab is a standard set of (space-independent)
gamma matrices and where Eµ
aR(x) (where x ∈ Y ) are vierbeins corresponding
to the two positive deﬁnite metrics gL
µν, gR
L (x) =
δab Eµ
bL, etc. Note that the structure (51) assumes that we are given not only an
identiﬁcation map between corresponding points of the two sheets (here gauge-ﬁxed by the

µν given on the abstract manifold Y : gµν

aL(x), Eµ

aL Eν

identiﬁcation of the two underlying abstract manifolds and the use of only one coordinate
system xµ to describe the metrics on the two sheets), but also a one-to-one map between
the spin structures, and in particular between any choice of vierbein. In other words to
aR so that an arbitrary, local SO(4) rotation of Eµ
any Eµ
aL must correspond a unique Eµ
aL
corresponds to the same rotation of Eµ
aR. It is most natural to use as map Eµ
aR the
canonical map deﬁned in [35]. This map can be deﬁned by requiring that it reduces to simple
rescalings Eµ
aL when considering bi-orthogonal frames (as in Eq. (9) above).
For simplicity, the quantity m in Eq. (51) (which “connects” the two sheets) will be taken

aR = e−µa/2 Eµ

aL → Eµ

to be a constant real scalar. More generally, it could also be a matrix when considering
multiplets of fermions and could be space-dependent. We shall see that m is connected

with the coupling scale µ in Eq. (6). It might be interesting to consider generalized models
where m (and therefore µ) is linked to a ﬂuctuating scalar m(x) ∝ e−σ(x) as in [31].

25

The square of the Dirac operator (51) is easily obtained as

D2

X =

D/ 2

L + m2

m γ5(D/ L − D/ R)

m γ5(D/ R − D/ L)

D/ 2

R + m2



starts at order t−2 = m4
constant terms m4

The heat kernel expansion of (50) is a series in increasing powers of t = m−2

0 which
0. At this leading order the action I leads to two bare cosmological
0),

0/(4π2)R d4x(√gL +√gR). At the next to leading order, O(t−1) = O(m2
0/(48π2)R d4x(−√gL RL−√gR RR) (with negative
one gets two separate Einstein actions m2
signs, as is appropriate for an Euclidean action IE which is essentially IE = −IMinkowski with
a positive signature metric) as well as a “potential” term +R d4xV(gL, gR) proportional to
0 m2 scaling, the potential V contains no derivatives of gL or gR. It
m2
can therefore be evaluated by considering the case of constant metrics gL
µν. We can then
neglect the spin connections in (52) and go to the momentum representation (i ∂µ → kµ)
to set

0 m2. In view of its m2

µν, gR

Here k/ L ≡ γµ
L kµ, k/ R ≡ γµ
rewrite these as k/ L ≡ γa kL

D2

X =

k/ 2

L + m2

m γ5(k/ L − k/ R)

m γ5(k/ R − k/ L)

k/ 2

R + m2

 .

R kµ. Using the explicit vierbein expressions of γµ
a , k/ R ≡ γa kR
a ≡ kµ Eµ
kL

a ≡ kµ Eµ
kR
aR .

a , where

aL ,

L and γµ

R we can

In terms of these two diﬀerent vectors (that live in a local Euclidean space common to the
tangent spaces of the two sheets), one easily ﬁnds that the eigenvalues of D2

X are

k2
L + k2

R

2

+ m2 ±s (k2

L − k2

R)2

4

λ± =

+ m2(kL − kR)2 .

Here, all squares are evaluated with the ﬂat Euclidean metric δab appropriate to the local
Euclidean space where both kL
a live. In the limit m2 → 0 (appropriate to the heat
kernel expansion) the eigenvalues (56) read (we henceforth suppress the boldfacing of the
Euclidean vectors kL and kR)

a and kR

(53)

(54)

(55)

(56)

λ+ = k2

L + m2 + m2 (kL − kR)2
L − k2
k2

R

+ O(m4) ,

26

(57)

(58)

(59)

(60)

λ− = k2

R + m2 − m2 (kL − kR)2
L − k2
k2

R

+ O(m4) .

The heat kernel action reads

I = Tr exp (−t D2

X) = 4Z d4xZ

d4k
(2π)4 [e−tλ+ + e−tλ−],

where the 4 comes from the trace in spinor space and where d4k is the fourfold integral over
the covariant components kµ. Expanding (58) in powers of m2 leads to the mixing term
+ 4 m2

0 m2R d4x (V1 + V2) where
V1 = −t2Z

d4k
(2π)4

R

L − e−tk2
e−tk2
k2
L − k2

R

(kL − kR)2 ,

V2 = −t2Z

d4k
(2π)4 (e−tk2

L + e−tk2

R) .

0 = t−1 in front of V1 and V2, the expressions (59), (60) are
After our factorization of m2
easily seen to be t-independent. We can then evaluate them by setting, say, t = 1 in them.
Noting that k2

L kµ kν, etc., V2 is easily evaluated:

L = δab kL

b = gµν

a kL

L )− 1

R )− 1

2 + (det gµν

V2 = −c4((det gµν

2 ) = −c4(√gL + √gR)
where c4 ≡ (16π2)−1 and where gL ≡ det gL
L )−1. The potential V1 is much more
tricky. However, it can be nicely expressed by introducing a Schwinger-type parameter α
(varying between 0 and 1) and by using the identity (e−a−e−b)/(a−b) ≡ −R 1
0 dα exp[−((1−
α)a + αb)]. This naturally leads to the introduction of a one-parameter family of metrics

µν = (det gµν

(61)

g(α) interpolating between gL and gR (reached, respectively, when α = 0 and α = 1). More
precisely we deﬁne

gµν(α) ≡ (1 − α) gµν

L + α gµν
R .

(62)

[Note that the “line” connecting gL to gR is “straight” when expressed in terms of con-
travariant metrics (which naturally appear in the squared Dirac operator D2 = −gµν ∂µν =
+ gµν kµ kν), but will become “curved” when expressed in terms of the covariant compo-
In terms of the deﬁnition (62) (and the associated gµσ(α) gσν(α) = δν
nents gµν(α).]
µ,
g(α) ≡ det gµν(α) ≡ (det gµν(α))−1) we ﬁnd that V1 can be written as
dαqg(α) gµν(α) ,

aZ 1

c4 ∆Eµ

a ∆Eν

V1 = +

(63)

1
2

0

27

a ≡ Eµ

aR − Eµ

aL. Finally, the O(m2) piece of the Euclidean action (i.e. the “po-
where ∆Eµ
tential”, remembering that LEucl. = −LMink.) predicted by the non-commutative approach
to two-sheeted spaces reads +R d4xV with
aZ 1

dαqg(α) gµν(α) − √gL − √gR(cid:21) .

0 m2
4π2

a ∆Eν

(cid:20) 1

V =

∆Eµ

(64)

m2

2

0

The explicit evaluation of the α-integral in (64) can be reduced to (incomplete) elliptic

integrals. In fact, it can be reduced to the evaluation of the single integral

by using the identity

I(gL, gR) ≡Z 1

0

dαqg(α) =Z 1

0

dα

qdet((1 − α) gµν

L + α gµν
R )

  ∂

∂ gµν
L

R! I(gL, gR) = −

∂
∂ gµ

+

1

2Z 1

0

dαqg(α) gµν(α) .

When considering a bi-orthogonal frame, say with Eµ

aL = diag(e−µL

a /2), Eµ

(so that gL

µν = diag(e+µL

a ) the
integral (65) is a rather simple elliptic integral of the ﬁrst kind which, in principle, can be

L gR = diag(eµa) with µa = µR

µν = diag(e+µR

a ) and g−1

a ), gR

explicitly expressed in terms of the eigenvalues λL,R
is the discussion of the “weak-excitation” limit of V, i.e. the limit µa = µR
(g−1
L gR)µ
σ2 = Σ µ2

. Of more direct interest for us
a → 0, i.e.
ν → 0. In this limit we ﬁnd that V behaves as (with σ1 = Σ µa,

ν + hµ
ν = δµ
a as above)

a − µL

ν with hµ

a ≡ eµL,R

a

a /2)

aR = diag(e−µR
a − µL

V ≃

(gL gR)

=

(gL gR)

m2

0 m2
4π2

m2

0 m2
4π2

1

4 −2 +
4(cid:18)−2 +

1

σ2
8 −

σ2
1

16!

1
8

µ hµ
hν

ν −

1
16

(hν

µ)2(cid:19) .

(65)

(66)

(67)

Besides a negative m2-dependent, contribution to the cosmological constant (which has

anyway bare contributions O(m4
for weak excitations away from gL

0)), we see that we do not get a Pauli-Fierz-type mass term
µν. We get instead (remembering that the (bare)

µν = gR

Planck mass is M 2

L = M 2

R = m2

0/(48π2)) a mass term proportional to m2hhν

µ hµ

ν − 1

2 (hν

µ)2i.

28

µ hµ

ν −(hµ

Such a mass term contains a scalar ghost, but has the virtue (contrary to the Pauli-Fierz one
µ)2]) of exhibiting excellent continuity properties of the limit m2 → 0 for all
∼ m2 [hν
processes linked to the generation of gravitational ﬁelds by sources (see, e.g., Appendix C
of [37] where it is easily seen that α = 1/2 leads to an Einstein-like propagator hµν T µν ∝
T µν(✷ − m2)−1 (cid:16)Tµν − 1

2 ηµν T(cid:17)).

4 Phenomenology of Multigravity

4.1 Bigravity, and bicosmology, versus massive gravity

There is quite a sizable (and somewhat confusing) literature about the “problems” raised

by having either “massive gravity” (i.e. a kind of ﬁnite-range version of Einstein’s theory),

or a “massive graviton” in addition to Einstein’s massless one. We leave to a future publi-
cation a detailed discussion of such issues, but wish to emphasize the fact that the change
of paradigm, brought by focusing on a fully nonlinear bigravity theory, drastically modiﬁes,

in our opinion, the way one should view the traditional “problems” of massive gravity (in

both senses recalled in the sentence above). One of the basic points is that many of the

“problematic” issues (such as, unboundedness of the energy, singularity of the inﬁnite-range

limit) simply loose their meaning in a general bigravity setting. Indeed, these problematic

issues make sense only for states (in some theories) which are, at least asymptotically,

close to some trivial, Poincar´e invariant background. We think that, even when consider-
ing formally “small” excitations above a trivial background state gL

µν(x) = ηµν,
the exact bigravity conﬁgurations will generically develop into full-blown “bi-cosmological”

µν(x) = gR

conﬁgurations with ﬁelds that grow so much (in time and/or in space) so as to be outside

the usually considered domain of bi-asymptotically ﬂat conﬁgurations containing localized
excitations. Note that most of the results concerning the “discontinuity” of the m2 → 0
limit [38], [39], [37] implicitly (or explicitly) assumed such a framework of asymptotically

decaying perturbations of a (minimum energy) Poincar´e invariant background. We think

that, if one relaxes this asymptotic restriction, there exists a sector of bigravity theories
which exhibits “physical continuity” for small m2, at the cost of cosmological behaviour
on large scales. Note that such a claim, while being consistent with the works [40, 41, 42]

which found continuity of massive graviton interactions in maximally symmetric ((A)dS)

cosmological backgrounds, is somewhat diﬀerent from the claim of [43],[44]. Indeed, the

29

latter claim seems to insist on a framework (and a language, like that of propagators, cou-

pling and scattering states) which preassumes the restriction to localized excitations of a

Poincar´e-invariant vacuum, i.e. that the metrics under consideration are asymptotically
ﬂat. Leaving to a future publication a detailed discussion of the “discontinuity” issue, we
shall content ourselves here to sketch the general dynamical structure `a la Arnowitt-Deser-

Misner (ADM) [36] of bigravity theories.

4.2 ADM analysis of bigravity theories

We consider a general bigravity action (6). Let us decompose the two spacetime metrics

4gL

µν, 4gR
ij N j

µν into the two lapses NL, NR (NL ≡ (− 4g00
ij (gL
L ≡ 4gL

0i) and the two spatial metrics gL

ij, gR

L )− 1
ij ≡ 4gL

(4gL

ij). We have

2 ), the two shift vectors N i

L, N i
R

ds2

ds2

L = −N 2
R = −N 2

L dt2 + gL

ij(dxi + N i

L dt)(dxj + N j

L dt) ,

R dt2 + gR

ij(dxi + N i

R dt)(dxj + N j

R dt) .

After integration by parts, each separate “Left” or “Right” pieces of the action (6) reads

(say for the Left piece)

IL =Z dtZ d3x (πij

L ˙gL

ij + ΠL ˙ΦL − NL HL − N i

L H L
i )

where πij
L is the Left gravitational momentum density, ΠL is a (generic) matter momentum
density and where the left super-Hamiltonian, and super-momentum densities have the
structure

HL =

1
M 2
L

1

√gL(cid:18)πij

L πL

ij −

1
2

π2

L(cid:19) − M 2

L √gL RL + H matter

L

,

H L
i = −2 DL

j πj

Li + H L matter

i

.

4gR). Using the fact that the
Let us now consider the interaction term −(4gL
local scalar V must be (in particular) invariant under transformations of the type dt′ = λ dt,
j(dxj + vj dt) one ﬁnds that it can only depend on the lapses and shifts through
dx′i = Λi
L)/√NL NR. Let us then replace the 8 variables NL,

4 V (4g−1
L

4gR)

1

(68)

(69)

(70)

(71)

L, NR, N i

the combinations NR/NL and (N i
N i
R by the combinations

R − N i
N ≡qNR NL , n ≡s NR

NL

i

, N

1
2

≡

(N i

R + N i

L) , ni ≡

R − N i
N i
2 √NR NL

L

.

(72)

30

With these deﬁnitions it is found that the total action reads

I =Z dtZ d3x (πij

L ˙gL

ij + πij

R ˙gR

ij + ΠL ˙ΦL + ΠR ˙ΦR − H)

(73)

where the total Hamiltonian density reads (here and below gL
and gL ≡ det gL

ij, gR ≡ det gR
ij)

ij, gR

ij are the spatial metrics

i

H(N , N

, n, ni, gL, πL, gR, πR, ΦL, ΠL, ΦR, ΠR) = N H + N

i

H i

(74)

where

H(n, ni, g, π, Φ, Π) = n−1 HL + n HR − ni H L

i + ni H R

i + (gL gR)

1

4 V (n, ni, gL, gR) ,

(75)

H i(g, π, Φ, Π) = H L

i + H R
i

.

(76)

The crucial point for the present discussion is the separation of the 8 lapse and shift
variables into two sets: (i) the four “average” lapse and shifts N , N i, which are true
Lagrange multipliers appearing only linearly in the action, and (ii) the four “relative” lapse
and shifts n, ni which enter algebraically in the action (no kinetic terms) but in a non linear
manner. The four average lapse and shifts give rise to four constraints, which are linked to
the symmetry of the action under common diﬀeomorphisms:

H = 0 ,

H i = 0 .

(77)

N, N i are gauge variables which can be gauged away (e.g. to N = 1, N i = 0). The four
(ﬁrst-class) constraints (77) can be used, together with the ﬁeld equations (which involve N
and N i) to eliminate four degrees of freedom (i.e. eight functions of positions and momenta).
By contrast, the four relative lapse and shifts n, ni are not (undeterminable) gauge variables
but are dynamical variables which are instantaneously determinable in terms of the other

variables (g, π, Φ, Π) by their (algebraic) equations of motion:

∂ H
∂ n

= 0 ,

∂ H
∂ ni = 0 .

(78)

This result generalizes the ﬁndings of [37] which studied the case of “massive gravity”, i.e.
(21). We must assume here that the potential V has a “good” dependence on n and ni

which allow for an (essential) unique solution of Eqs. (78) for a generic (or at least an

31

open) domain of free dynamical data g, π, Φ, Π. We think that the only (covariant) sit-

i

µν)1/2 + cR(− det 4gR

uation where n and ni combine with N , N
to generate more (gauge-related) Lagrange
multipliers is the case where V is linear in NL and NR, which must then correspond
(by covariance) to V = cL NL √gL + cR NR √gR = cL(− det 4gL
µν)1/2.
For instance, we can think that V (n, ni) contains terms quadratic in ni (as already fol-
lows from a Pauli-Fierz mass term), and behaves, for both large (respectively, small)
n as + a n2 (respectively + b n−2). Note also that if we deﬁne the new scalar poten-
tial V new by factoring (− det 4gL
µν)1/2 instead of (4gL 4gR)1/4 from V,
i.e. V = ((− det 4gL
µν)1/2)V new, the last term in Eq. (75) will become
(n−1√gL + n√gR)V new(n, ni, gL, gR). It is then enough to require that V new(n) grows in
any manner (even logarithmically) towards +∞, as n → +∞ or n → 0. Such conditions
ensure the existence of (possibly non unique) solutions of the equations of motion of n and
ni, Eq. (78).

µν)1/2 + (− det 4gR

µν)1/2 + (− det 4gR

We can then use (78) to eliminate n and ni (by replacing them by their expression in

terms of the other dynamical data). It is then easily seen that the reduced Hamiltonian

H red(g, π, Φ, Π) obtained by inserting these expressions into (75) deﬁnes (together with

(76)) a dynamical system for the variables gL

ij, πij

L , gR

ij, πij

R , ΦL, ΠL, ΦR, ΠR (submitted

to the four ﬁrst-class constraints (77) coming from the Lagrange multipliers N, N

). For

i

instance, if we consider the matter-free system, we end up with the 6 + 6 degrees of freedom
linked to gL

ij, from which must be subtracted 4 degrees of freedom killed by the
ﬁrst-class constraints (77). This leaves us with 8 degrees of freedom. As in the analysis of

ij and gR

(nonlinear) massive gravity in [37], which concluded to the presence of 6 degrees of freedom

(instead of the expected 5 of a Pauli-Fierz linear graviton), we have here 2 + 6 = 8 (where

the 2 can be formally thought of as corresponding to an Einstein (massless) graviton, and

the 6 to a “massive graviton”).

Two of the potential defects of the supplementary tensor degree of freedom (1 = 6 − 5)
are, according to [37]: (i) the unboundedness of the total “energy”, and (ii) experimental

diﬃculties (e.g. with light scattering by the Sun), even if a suitable mass term can be
found for which the m2 → 0 limit exists. Our point of view concerning (i) is to argue
that the notion of energy is not deﬁned when considering (as we argue must be done) non-

asymptotically ﬂat metrics, with cosmological-type behaviour at inﬁnity. Alternatively, we

32

can dismiss the problem of spatial boundary conditions by considering spatially compact

manifolds (e.g. with toroidal topology). For such a situation, the dynamics associated to

(73)–(78) should entail a well-deﬁned (classical) evolution system for gL, πL, gR, πR, . . . The
ill-deﬁned issue of “unbounded energy” is then transformed in a well-posed dynamical ques-
tion: do Hamilton’s equations of motion quickly lead to a catastrophic evolution towards
some singular state?, or do they admit many solutions which evolve rather quietly on times

scales comparable to the age of the universe? (which is the only stability property which

is really required by experimental data). This question will be discussed in detail in [12].
Let us only mention here the result that there does exist, for suitable potentials V, many
solutions which can quietly evolve on Hubble time scales or more.

4.3 Phenomenology and a new form of dark energy

Using the dynamical, and cosmological like, viewpoint expressed in the previous subsection,
let us now brieﬂy discuss why we think that bigravity is not only compatible with existing
gravitational data, but might also furnish a natural explanation of the recently observed
cosmic acceleration. Let us ﬁrst argue that there exist large classes of bigravity data
gL, πL, gR, πR, . . . which can adequately represent the universe as we see it at the present
moment. For deﬁniteness, we assume that we “live on the right brane” (when viewed in

brane language), i.e. that the matter around as is made of ΦR-type matter only. Let us start
by considering an instantaneous “Einstein” model of our universe, i.e. an exact solution
gR, πR, ΦR, ΠR of the constraints H R = 0 = H R
i . Let us complete this conﬁguration by
a random “Einstein” model of the (shadow) left universe, i.e. a solution gL, πL, ΦL, ΠL of
H L = 0 = H L

i . Taken together, these two conﬁgurations “nearly” satisfy the bigravity
constraints (77) and (78). More precisely, (77) is satisﬁed modulo a term proportional
to V , while (78) is satisﬁed modulo terms proportional to ∂V /∂n and ∂V /∂ni. Let us
assume that all dimensionless variables (n, ni and g−1
L gR) are of order unity, and that
V ∝ µ4 is at most comparable to the average cosmological energy density V ∼ 10−29 g cm−3
(i.e. µ ∼ 10−3 eV) (in right units, say).
Instead of viewing Eqs. (78) as equations for
determining n and ni, we can pick rather arbitrary (initial) values of n and ni (or order

unity) and slightly deform the Einstein data gR, πR, . . . , gL, πL, . . . to compensate for the
small violation of the usual Einstein constraints brought by the terms proportional to V ,
∂V /∂n and ∂V /∂ni. It is intuitively clear that there are many ways of doing so, i.e. of

constructing exact bigravity initial data gR, πR, . . . , gL, πL, . . . which exactly satisfy (77)

33

and (78) for arbitrarily given n and ni. Locally, say around our Galaxy, the new, deformed
data gR, πR, . . . can be constructed so as to be experimentally indistinguishable from a pure
Einstein model (after all, we are simply modifying the stress-energy tensor in the Galaxy
by less than 10−29 g cm−3, which is many orders of magnitude smaller than the average
density in the Galaxy). If the dependence of V on n and ni is adequate the equations (78)
will continue to admit a solution (n, ni) during the future evolution of the other dynamical

variables.

In fact, as (under a general assumption made in Section 2 above) we know

one exact (but physically trivial) solution of the full bigravity evolution equations, namely
µν(t, x), i.e. gL = gR, πL = πR, ΦL = ΦR, . . . with n = 1, ni = 0, we
µν(t, x) = gR
gL
expect (by mathematical continuity) that there will be classes of bigravity solutions where,
during a long time, gL ≃ gR, πL ≃ πR, . . . with n ≃ 1, ni ≃ 0. The crucial question is
whether one can solve Eqs. (78) for a long time (without catastrophe) for more general
data where g−1
L gR = O(1) and n = O(1) = ni. This question will be addressed in [12] for
cosmological-type solutions and in [13] for solar-system-type solutions. Note that this is
here that the potential “discontinuity” problems linked to the m2 → 0 (or µ → 0) limit
show up because the potential V (n, ni) is proportional to µ4, so that, when solving for n
and ni Eqs. (78), µ4 will tend to appear in a denominator and might cause the solution n, ni

to take parametrically large values, proportional to some negative power of µ (depending
on the behaviour of, say, V (n) as n → +∞ or n → 0).

Assuming, for the time being, the continuous existence of regular bigravity solutions,
evolved from some data gL, πL, gR, πR, n, ni, . . . we can ﬁnish by mentioning some of the
pleasing phenomenological aspects of bigravity. First, bigravity exactly satisﬁes the equiva-

lence principle, because each type of matter (say ΦR whithin “our universe”) is universally
coupled to the corresponding metric, say gR
µν. Second, (as just discussed) there are classes
of bigravity solutions which diﬀer from standard Einstein ones only by the presence “on

µν ∼ 10−29 g cm3 in the covariant form (14)), which locally modify gR

the right-hand side” of Einstein’s equations of numerically very small additional terms (say
µν ∼ tL
tR
µν and ΦR (and
gL
µν, ΦL) only in a numerically very small way (though they might globally forbid the stable
existence of asymptotically ﬂat models). These solutions will be fully compatible with all

local (or quasi-local) experimental tests of relativistic gravity: such as solar-system tests
and binary-pulsar tests. Third, if µ indeed happens to be of the order of 10−3 eV, and
if g−1

L gR is of order unity, bigravity will only lead to experimentally signiﬁcant deviations

34

from Einstein’s gravity on cosmological scales. Moreover, if, seen from our universe gR
µν,

we view gL

µν as an “external ﬁeld”, or, more precisely, if we (approximately) view the “dif-

ference” between the two metrics g−1
order unity, the potential term V = √gR(g−1

L gR) can be approximately viewed
as a time-varying “vacuum energy” term (of order µ4), i.e. as a kind of “dark energy”. It

R gL)

1

4 V (g−1

L gR as a given (time varying) tensor “condensate” of

is tempting to assume that this new form of dark energy (which might be called “tensor

quintessence”) can explain the observed cosmic acceleration. It might also be used in pri-

mordial cosmological scenarios, possibly when using the idea mentioned above that µ could

be an evolving ﬁeld. See [12] for a study of this new form of dark energy, and its phe-

nomenological diﬀerences with quintessence models based on evolving scalar (rather than

tensor) condensates.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we suggested a new paradigm concerning “massive gravity” and “large scale
modiﬁcation of gravity”. Considering the fully nonlinear bigravity action suggests to change

viewpoint: instead of the theory with massless and massive graviton(s) we had in linearized

approximation, we are dealing with several interacting metrics. We introduced the concept

of universality class which we formulated using bigravity (two interacting metrics) as an

example. Diﬀerent approaches (brane, KK, non-commutative geometry) naturally lead to

diﬀerent universality classes for the fully nonlinear bigravity action. Another important
new suggestion is that almost all solutions must now be of the non-asymptotically ﬂat

(cosmological) type.

This new formulation can change the standard problematic of the m2 → 0 discontinuity.
We showed the existence of classes of solutions that are compatible with “our universe”.
However, we do not claim to have proven that general solutions of bigravity are phenomeno-

logically acceptable. The two main problems of massive gravity (ghost, potential blow up
of some ﬁeld variables when m2 → 0) must still be examined in detail. The important
problem is to ﬁnd the matching to the local sources of the ﬁeld so that the full metric is
free of singularities. We do not worry about matching at inﬁnity because we abandon the
requirement of asymptotic ﬂatness.
It is possible that in some models of bigravity such
local matching does not exist because of the explicit or implicit presence of ghost modes in
the theory. Such models would be physically unacceptable. We note in this respect that

35

the 6-dimensional model discussed in [21] which does not contain negative tension branes,

contains instead either branes with equations of state violating the weak energy condition
ℓµ ℓν ≥ 0 ( with light-like ℓµ) or has a conifold singularity in the bulk. The physical
T brane
consistency of this model must be further investigated. We have also quoted mathematical

µν

theorems linking the existence of a hierarchical spectrum (necessary for the derivation of

an eﬀective bigravity Lagrangian) to the necessary negativity of the Ricci curvature of the

compactiﬁed manifold. This sign condition might hide the presence of ghost-like ﬁelds in
the theory. These questions are pressing and deserve detailed investigation.

Assuming a positive resolution of these issues or simply taking the phenomenological
viewpoint that nonlinear bigravity Lagrangians open an interesting new arena for non

standard gravitational eﬀects, we shall explore in future publications [12], [13] the nonlinear

physics of bigravity actions, with a particular view on its cosmological aspects, as it may
provide a natural candidate for some new type of “dark energy”.

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank P. B´erard, M. Berger, A. Connes, J.
Fr¨ohlich, M. Gromov, M. Kontsevitch, A. Papazoglou, G. Ross and A. Vainshtein for infor-

mative discussions. I.K. is supported in part by PPARC rolling grant PPA/G/O/1998/00567

and EC TMR grants HPRN-CT-2000-00152 and HRRN-CT-2000-00148.

Appendix

In this Appendix we check the consistency of the linearized limit of the nonlinear action

(6) with a direct linearized analysis of the coupling strengths of massless and light graviton

modes in brane models. Omitting the tensor structure (and considering only the relative co-

eﬃcients between the various terms) the Lagrangian describing the coupling of the massless
graviton mode h0, and of the lightest one h1, reads

LLin = h0∂2h0 + h1(cid:16)∂2 + m2

1(cid:17) h1 +

1

Mp(cid:16)h0 + αLh1(cid:17) TL +

1

Mp (cid:16)h0 − αRh1(cid:17) TR

(79)

where the coeﬃcients αL,R describe the relative strengths of the massive graviton coupling
to the matter on left and right branes.
It seems that there are four parameters here:
Mp, m1, αL, and αR. But actually αL = α−1
R which is extremely important as we shall
see next. This relation follows from the expression for αR which was obtained in [1] (see

36

-
α

L  

-
α

R

α

L  

-
=L 1

L 2  
-

L

1

L

2

0

L

1

L

2

α

R

y

Figure 4: Here L1 is the position of the bounce. The left conﬁguration is just the mirror
image of the right one and the positions of the bounces are related by ¯L1 = L2 − L1. Under
this transformation left and right branes are exchange their roles and, at the same time,
αR = exp(2L1 − L2) → ¯αR = exp(2L2 − L1) = α−1
R .

Eq.(20) and Eq.(22) there)

αR = exp (2L1 − L2) .

Being derived originally for the + − + model this expression holds for other models with
bigravity, for example the ++ model. In Figure 3 it is shown that one can interchange left
and right branes by changing the position of the bounce from L1 to ¯L1 = L2 − L1. One
gets the new coupling strength

¯αR = exp(cid:16)2 ¯L1 − L2(cid:17) = exp (L2 − 2L1) =

1
αR

.

At the same time it is easy to see that a new right brane is just an old left one, so that we
have the result

(80)

(81)

(82)

αL = ¯αR =

1
αR

.

This relation is crucial to the consistency of the nonlinear bigravity approach because only
in this case can one relate h0 and h1 to hL ∼ (h0 + αLh1) and hR ∼ (h0 − αRh1) by
orthogonal rotation. If it were not the case one would get mixing between hL and hR even
in the limit m1 = 0 and we could not have two non-interacting worlds. Introducing

hL = cos θh0 + sin θh1,

, hR = sin θh0 − cos θh1 , tan θ = αR

(83)

we can rewrite (79) as

LLin = hL∂2hL + hR∂2hR +

m2
1
L + M 2
R

M 2

(MLhR − MRhL)2 +

1
ML

1
MR

hLTL +

hRTR

(84)

37

where ML = Mp/√1 + α2, MR = αMp/√1 + α2

Let us note that in the limit L2 → ∞ both αL and Mp are divergent and αR → 0. In
this limit ML is ﬁnite and MR → ∞. The massless graviton hR becomes essentially a free
sterile particle and decouples from the spectrum, while the massive graviton hR interacts
with matter on the left brane only. Long range gravity completely decouples from the right
brane.

Here we discussed the linearized bigravity lagrangian for ﬂat branes, but one can get
the same picture for (A)dS branes. The limiting case L2 → ∞ with corresponds to a single
AdS4 brane was considered in [20] (see also [14, 45, 46, 47]).

References

[1] I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou, G. G. Ross and J. Santiago, Nucl. Phys.

B 584, 313 (2000) [hep-ph/9912552].

[2] R. Gregory, V. A. Rubakov and S. M. Sibiryakov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5928 (2000)

[hep-th/0002072].

[3] I. I. Kogan and G. G. Ross, Phys. Lett. B 485, 255 (2000) [hep-th/0003074].

[4] I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou and G. G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B 595, 225

(2001) [hep-th/0006030].

[5] I. I. Kogan, arXiv:astro-ph/0108220.

[6] A. Papazoglou, D.Phil. Thesis [arXiv:hep-ph/0112159].

[7] I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou and G. G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B 615 (2001)

191 [arXiv:hep-ph/0107307].

[8] C. Csaki, J. Erlich and T. J. Hollowood, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) 5932 [hep-

[9] G. Dvali, G. Gabadadze and M. Porrati, Phys. Lett. B 484, 112 (2000) [hep-

th/0002161].

th/0002190].

[10] N. Boulanger, T. Damour, L. Gualtieri and M. Henneaux, Nucl. Phys. B 597 (2001)

127 [arXiv:hep-th/0007220]; arXiv:hep-th/0009109.

38

[11] C. J. Isham, A. Salam and J. Strathdee, Phys. Rev. D 3 (1971) 867.

[12] T. Damour, I. Kogan and A. Papazoglou, arXiv:hep-th/0206044.

[13] T. Damour, I. Kogan and A. Papazoglou, work in progress

[14] M. Porrati, arXiv:hep-th/0112166.

[15] V. A. Rubakov, Phys. Usp. 44 (2001) 871 [Usp. Fiz. Nauk 171 (2001) 913] [arXiv:hep-

ph/0104152].

[16] M. Gogberashvili, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 14 (1999) 2025 [arXiv:hep-ph/9904383].

[17] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4690 [arXiv:hep-th/9906064].

[18] C. Csaki, J. Erlich, T. J. Hollowood and Y. Shirman, Nucl. Phys. B 581 (2000) 309

[arXiv:hep-th/0001033].

th/0011141].

[19] I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos and A. Papazoglou, Phys. Lett. B 501, 140 (2001) [hep-

[20] A. Karch and L. Randall, JHEP 0105 (2001) 008 [arXiv:hep-th/0011156].

[21] I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou and G. G. Ross, hep-th/0107086.

[22] A. S. Gorsky and K. G. Selivanov, Phys. Lett. B 485 (2000) 271 [arXiv:hep-

th/0005066]; arXiv:hep-th/0006044; arXiv:hep-th/0009207.

[23] J. R. Ellis, N. E. Mavromatos and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 084019

[arXiv:gr-qc/0006004]; G. K. Leontaris and N. E. Mavromatos, Phys. Rev. D 64 (2001)

024008 [arXiv:hep-th/0011102].

[24] L. Pilo, R. Rattazzi and A. Zaﬀaroni, JHEP 0007 (2000) 056 [arXiv:hep-th/0004028];

I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos, A. Papazoglou and L. Pilo, Nucl. Phys. B 625 (2002)

179 [arXiv:hep-th/0105255].

ph/9907447].

[25] W. D. Goldberger and M. B. Wise, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 4922 [arXiv:hep-

[26] P. B´erard, Spectral Geometry:Direct and Inverse Problems, Lecture Notes in Mathe-

matics 1207 (Springer, Berlin, 1986).

39

[27] M. Ledoux, Annales de la Facult´e des Sciences de Toulouse, 9 (2000) 305.

[28] M. Berger, P. Gauduchon and E. Mazet, Le Spectre d’une Vari´et´e Riemannienne ,

Lecture Notes in Mathematics 194 (Springer, Berlin, 1971); M. Berger, Riemannian

Geometry Today: Introduction and Panorama (Springer, 2002, in press).

[29] A. Connes, Inst.Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math. 62 (1985) 257; G´eom´etrie Non Com-
mutative (InterEditions, Paris, 1990); Non Commutative Geometry (Academic Press,

San Diego, 1994).

[30] A. Connes and J. Lott, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 18B (1991) 29.

[31] A. H. Chamseddine, G. Felder and J. Fr¨ohlich, Commun. Math. Phys. 155 (1993) 205

[arXiv:hep-th/9209044].

[32] A. H. Chamseddine and J. Fr¨ohlich, arXiv:hep-th/9307012.

[33] A. H. Chamseddine, J. Fr¨ohlich and O. Grandjean, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 6255

[arXiv:hep-th/9503093].

[34] A. H. Chamseddine and A. Connes, Commun. Math. Phys. 186 (1997) 731 [arXiv:hep-

th/9606001]; Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 4868 [arXiv:hep-th/9606056].

[35] J. P. Bourguignon and P. Gauduchon, Commun. Math. Phys. 144 (1992) 581.

[36] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser and C. W. Misner, in Gravitation: an introduction to current

research, ed. by L. Witten (Wiley, New York, 1962), pp 227 -265.

[37] D. G. Boulware and S. Deser, Phys. Rev. D 6, 3368 (1972).

[38] H. van Dam and M. Veltman, Nucl. Phys. B 22, 397 (1970).

[39] V.I. Zakharov, JETP Lett. 12 (1970) 312.

[40] A. Higuchi, Nucl. Phys. B 325, 745 (1989).

[41] I. I. Kogan, S. Mouslopoulos and A. Papazoglou, Phys. Lett. B 503 (2001) 173

[arXiv:hep-th/0011138].

[42] M. Porrati, Phys. Lett. B 498 (2001) 92 [arXiv:hep-th/0011152].

40

[43] A. I. Vainshtein, Phys. Lett. B 39 (1972) 393.

[44] C. Deﬀayet, G. R. Dvali, G. Gabadadze and A. I. Vainshtein, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002)

044026 [arXiv:hep-th/0106001].

[45] M. Porrati, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002) 044015 [arXiv:hep-th/0109017].

[46] A. Miemiec, Fortsch. Phys. 49 (2001) 747 [arXiv:hep-th/0011160].

[47] M. D. Schwartz, Phys. Lett. B 502 (2001) 223 [arXiv:hep-th/0011177].

41

