 

 

1 

Bigravity: a bimetric model of the Universe with variable 

constants, including VSL (variable speed of light) 

Jean-Pierre Petit and Gilles d'Agostini 

jppetit1937@yahoo.fr  

 

 

International Meeting on Variational Techniques (CITV) - August 2007 

______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Abstract 
The  universe,  far  from  being  homogenous,  expands  in  large  empty  bubbles  of  large-scale 
structure,  but  not  in  mass  concentrations  like  galaxies,  so  that  the  Robertson-Walker  solution 
does not fit. We suggest that a symmetry breaking occurred in a distant past, during the radiation-
dominated era. Before, the three-dimensional hypersurface was invariant under the action of O(3) 
and  the  Robertson-Walker  solution  could  be  used.  But  this  obliges  the  so  called  constants  of 
physics, length and time scale factors, to be involved through a generalized gauge process, which 
is thus built. The subsequent variation of the speed of light solves the horizon problem, while the 
Planck barrier disappears.  
______________________________________________________________________________ 
 
The  present  work  is  fairly  different  from  other  attempts  published  on  the  now  so-called  VSL, 
variable speed of light. The reader will find these other papers mentioned in the references at the 
end of  this paper.  
 
1) Introduction 
 
Let's  present  the  general  idea.  The  classical  cosmological  model  was  built  from  the  Robertson-
Walker  solution  of  the  Einstein  field  equations.  This  solution  is  based  on  the  cosmological 
principle  assuming  the  Universe  is  homogeneous  and  isotropic.  Initially  the  model-makers 
believed that they could consider the Universe as a gas whose molecules would be the galaxies. 
In clusters these galaxies have a random velocity which may be compared to the thermal velocity 
of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  The  order  of  magnitude  of  the  random  galaxy  velocities,  with 
respect  to  the  galaxy  clusters,  is  around  1000  km/s,  which  is  small  if  compared  to  the  speed  of 
light. So that theoreticians thought that this velocity could be neglected, this cosmic fluid being 
compared to dust ("dust Universe"). This was widely confirmed by observations. 
Oppositely  the  observation  of  the  large-scale  structure  gave  evidence  that  matter  was  arranged 
around  big  voids,  100  light-years  across  in  the  mean,  to  be  compared  to  joined  soap  bubbles". 
That was frankly non-homogeneous. As a consequence the curvature field is non-uniform. 
A  puzzling  problem  arises.  Astronomers  measure  redshifts  and  conclude  that  the  Universe  is 
expanding,  according  to  Hubble's  law.  But  where  does  this  expansion  occur?  Does  the  solar 
system expand? No. If it were expanding, it would be unstable. Do the galaxies expand? No, for 
the same reason.  
To explain the measured redshifts we must admit some regions expand in the Universe and some 
others  do  not.  Basically,  the  Robertson-Walker  metric  cannot  take  into  account  this  non-
homogeneity. In the Robertson-Walker metric we find a length scale factor R which depends only 
on the time-marker x°. It does not depend on space coordinates. It is supposed to be constant over 
the  whole  three-dimensional  hypersurface  S(x°)  at  a  given  instant  x°.  It  does  not  fit  the 
observations so that we should think about a length scale factor which would depend on time and 
space.  At  microscopic  scale  we  find  cosmological,  primeval  photons  forming  the  CMB,  the 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

cosmic microwave background radiation. Let us write their average wavelength as !. It expands 
like the length scale factor R. The great voids are filled by such photons. Here is the expansion of 
the Universe. Photons behave like oscillations moving on an expanding cloth. 
 
A material particle, whose mass is m, is associated to with a characteristic Compton's length: 
(1) 

 

 

If  we  consider  the  Planck  constant  h,  the  speed  of  light  c  and  the  mass  m  are  invariant,  this 
Compton's  length  does  not  vary  in  time.  From  this  point  of  view,  photons  expand  but  matter 
doesn't. This corresponds to an idea introduced by Mach in 1883. In 1990, I illustrated this idea 
using  a  didactic  image,  in  my  book  "The  Chronologicon"  from  the  series  "The  Adventures  of 
Archibald Higgins". This is the corresponding part, page 61:  
 

Figure 1: Page 61 of my book "The  Chronologicon" 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

When we travel backwards in time, the Universe becomes hotter and hotter and, quoting Steven 
Weinberg in his famous book "The first three minutes", it is "a mixture of all kinds of radiations". 
At this time, based on the CMB observation, the Universe looks very homogeneous. If we keep in 
mind the image of ice cubes immersed in water, they would melt and produce an homogeneous 
mixture.  
 
This suggests a symmetry breaking, occurring in distant time during the radiation-dominated era.  
Have a look at the Robertson-Walker metric. First we define Gaussian coordinates, which implies 
that the three-dimensional surface is "oriented in space" and "oriented in time".  
 

-  One assumes that there exists a global time-coordinate, a global time-marker x° 

-  Space is assumed to be locally isotropic. 

-  Any  two  points  in  a  three-dimensional  space  belonging  to  a  fixed  value  of  the  time-

coordinate are equivalent.  

 
We  choose  an  arbitrary  point  of  the  three-dimensional  space  to  be  the  origin  of  spherical 
coordinates (r ," , !).  
Introducing a length scale factor R(x°) we can write: 
(2) 

r = R(x°) u         

 

where  u is an adimensional variable. 
 
Then the  Robertson-Walker line element becomes:  
(3) 

 

 
k = { -1 , 0 , +1 } is the curvature index. The coordinates  (u , " , #) are pure numbers or angles. 
The hypothesis of isotropy and homogeneity gives a R-field which only depends on time. A point 
whose  coordinates  (u  , "  , #)  are  invariant  is  called  co-moving  (with  space).  As  pointed  out 
earlier this description does not fit with the observational data.  
 
We can offer a 2d didactic image of such geometry. See figure 2. On the right we have drawn a 
cube  with  blunt  vertices.  Each  vertex  is  one  eighth  of  a  sphere.  The  eight  blunt  corners  are 
connected  through  portions  (quarters)  of  cylinders  and  square  flat  surfaces,  i.e.  Euclidean 
elements.  The  two  images  3  and  4  in  figure  2  suggest  the  expansion  of  a  closed  Universe 
containing  eight  "mass  concentrations"  (the  eight  blunt  vertices).  The  flat  surfaces  expand,  not 
the curved corners. These keep a constant area. This is a didactic image of a closed Universe with 
mass  concentration  areas  (that  do  not  expand)  separated  by  voids  (the  Euclidean  portion  of 
cylinders and flat squares).  
 
The time-sequence is supposed to go from image 1 to image 4. In image 2 the eight portions of 
the  sphere  join  together.  Then  this  closed  universe  becomes  a  sphere,  that  has  O(2)  symmetry. 
We find a symmetry breaking from step 2 to step 3. Before, the O(2) symmetry holds. After, it 
doesn't.  

 

 

 

4 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Two-dimensional didactic image of an expanding,  
closed Universe experiencing a symmetry breaking in step 2.  

 

 
Geometers can immediately extend this for a three-dimensional closed surface, illustrated as a set 
of flat volumes joined to constant curvature portions of space. In the two-dimensional model we 
have shown eight "mass concentrations", but we could put as many as we want, thus forming a 
diamond-like  object,  with  blunt  vertices  (rounded  summits).  Similarly,  a  3-sphere  could  be 
transformed  into  a  many-3d-faces  3d-diamond  whose  curved  volumes  would  be  smoothed 
(constant curvature and constant volume object) linked by euclidean elements.  
 
Similarly  we  could  imagine  a  symmetry  breaking.  Before  the  objects  is  a  3-sphere,  having  an 
O(3) symmetry. After, this symmetry is broken or lost. The object becomes a three-dimensional 
polyhedron  where  each  constant  curvature  (and  volume)  portion  represents  a  galaxy  or  some 
mass concentration that does not expand. .  
 
This  is  the  general  idea.  We  suppose  the  Robertson-Walker  metric  is  suitable  to  describe  the 
(homogeneous)  early  Universe.  Then  a  symmetry  breaking  occurs,  very  early  in  the  radiation-
dominated  era.  Matter  concentrations  begin  to  form.  We  suggest  that  this  corresponds  to  two 
different evolution processes. 
 
When we want to build a model of cosmic evolution we have to deal with: 
 

-  Pure geometric features, governed by Einstein's field equations 

-  Features linked to special relativity (invariance through Lorentz rotations) 

-  Electromagnetic  features  (the  particles  are  linked  by  electromagnetic  forces,  ruled  by 

Maxwell's equations) 

Schrödinger equation.  

-  Quantification  is  present,  which  is  governed  by,  for  example,  the  (non  relativistic) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

All  these  features  come  from  local  observations  and  experiments,  which  satisfy  a  certain  set  of 
physical equations, containing  the following quantities:  
 
 

G: gravitational constant 
c: speed of light 
m: masses 
h: Planck constant 
e: elementary charge 
!o: magnetic constant (vacuum permeability) 

 
 
From  this  set  of  equations  we  can  build  measuring  instruments.  They  extend  our  senses.  But 
finally the last measuring instrument is ourselves, with our body as a length scale and our average 
life, a "shelf time", as a time scale. We may compare this duration to astronomical phenomena, 
like the year, the day (a complete rotation of the Earth). We can build mechanical systems, like a 
torsion  pendulum,  and  discover  that  they  can  be  used  as  clocks.  Comparing  this  object  to  our 
body, our hand, we can build rules. We can divide it, and so on.  
 
We replace the fully human measurement by mechanical measurements, based on the equations 
of physics. It works. We can perform measurements of constants and we don't find any change, 
so we think they should be absolute constants. Quantum mechanics works too and brings a new 
insight  into  the  nature  of  matter.  From  the  constant  of  today's  physics  we  can  build  two 
characteristic quantities  
 
The Planck length: 
(4) 

The Planck time: 
(5) 

 
 
Quantum mechanics generates its own limits in space and time. It becomes impossible, through 
QM  formalism,  to  analyse  or  even  to  conceive  processes  occurring  on  lengths  and  durations 
shorter than these characteristic values. 
 
As  the  scientist  believes  the  constants  found  are  absolute  constants,  that  do  not  vary  alongside 
cosmic evolution, he thinks of some hypothetical "quantum era" and asks how things could have 
been in the extremely early conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

2) Existence of a fundamental gauge relation 
 
All  physicists  know  the  power  of  dimensional  analysis.  Considering  a  given  set  of  physical 
equations they can introduce characteristic length and time and introduce adimensional space and 
time  variables.  Then  they  can  weight,  measure  the  relative  importance  of  different  terms  in  an 
equation in which the constants of physics appear.  
 
This could be extended, considering that we can use today's values of the constants, considering 
they  may  vary,  and  introduce  their  adimensional  form.  As  an  example,  let  us  consider  the 
constant  of  gravitation.  Call  Go  today's  measured  value.  If  we  admit  that  G  may  vary,  we  can 
write: 
(6) 

G = $  Go 

 
$  being an adimensional quantity. We can do similar operations for all constants, as we do for 
length and time. Now, ask the question:  
 

-  Can we find what we will call a generalized gauge transform, linking the length and time 
scale factors, and the adimensional variables, which takes into account the variation of the 
physical constants, and which would keep all the equations invariant? 

 
The answer is yes. There is a single one, see reference [4]. Note that we cannot obtain evidence 
of such variations using our measuring instruments. The reason is very simple: these systems are 
precisely built from these quantities, so it becomes impossible to find evidence for any constant 
variation among all these constants of physics.  
 
Similarly, if you wish to measure the dilatation of a table made of iron, using a ruler made of the 
same  metal,  due  to  ambient  thermal  variation  you  could  not  as  the  table  and  the  scale  would 
experience the same parallel variations. 
 
We will present further this generalized gauge transform. If  R and T are respectively the length 
and  time  scale  factors,  all  the  characteristic  lengths  of  physics,  including  the  Planck  length,  are 
found to vary like R. All the characteristic times of physics are found to vary like T. In addition, 
all  the  energies  are  conserved.  This  remarkable  gauge  property  is  based  on  a  group,  to  be 
discovered.  
 
 
 
3) Today's physics 
 
No  astronomer  would  pretend  that  the  solar  system  or  the  galaxies  expand  with  the  Universe. 
Consider  some  sort  of  reference  system  composed  by  two  masses  m  circling  aroung  their 
common center of gravity: 
 

Figure 3: Two masses orbiting around their common center of gravity 

 

 
 

 

 

 

7 

 

The centrifugal force is counterbalanced by the gravitational attraction: 
 (7) 

 

 
If  the  radius  of  this  circular  orbit  was  extended,  the  system  would  become  unstable.  In  the 
classical  vision  of  celestial  mechanics,  G  and  m    are  considered  to  be  absolute  constants.  The 
kinetic  energy  and  angular  momentum  are  conserved,  so  that  V  does  not  change  neither.  This 
circular  orbit  could  not  be  co-moving  in  a  Robertson-Walker  geometry,  where  the  expansion 
occurs everywhere.  
the  geodesics  of  a  four-dimensional  space-time 
In  general  relativity,  masses  follows 
hypersurface.  These  masses  cannot  follow  geodesics  associated  with  the  Robertson-Walker 
metric. We do not know, presently, how to build a solution of to the field equations which takes 
into  account  these  features.  When  we  make  local  calculations,  for  example  for  perihelion 
precession of Mercury or gravitational lensing, we use time-independent Schwarzschild solutions 
to the field equations.  
 
Let us return to our didactic image: the cube with blunt vertices and smoothes edges. Our circular 
orbit takes place in the non-expanding zone, in a corner which does not expand.  
 

 

Figure 4: Reference circular orbit location 

 
 
This  is  a  composite  geometry  since  curved  and  flat  elements  form  the  object.  To  be  closer  to 
reality,  this  circular  orbit  should  be  inscribed  in  a  non-expanding  volume,  part  of  a  three-
dimensional  hypersurface.  There,  it  would  be  part  of  a  region  of  space-time  that  would  behave 
like  a  quasi  steady-state  element  of  the  geometric  solution,  while  the  area  between  the  mass 
concentrations space-time would be close to a Friedman non-steady solution. Currently we do not 
know how to manage that.  
 
 

 

 

 

. 

 

 

8 

4) The early evolution as a generalized gauge process 
 
If  we  go  further  backwards  into  the  past,  we  meet  the  symmetry  breaking  event.  Then  the 
Robertson-Walker  solution  holds  and  the  Universe  obeys  an  O(3)  symmetry.  If  we  want  to 
inscribe the circular orbit corresponding to our two masses linked by gravitational force, the span 
of this co-moving orbit must vary like R(x°). See the small red circle: 

 

Figure 5: 2d didactic image of the symmetry breaking 

 
We  will  assume  the  Universe  undergoes  a  generalized  gauge  process,  keeping  the  equations 
invariant. At the end of this study the benefit will be the justification of the homogeneity of the 
early  Universe  with  no  need  to  call  for  the  inflation  theory.  Let  us  build  the  gauge  laws.  As 
shown  in  [1]  this  gauge  process  make  all  the  characteristic  lengths  of  physics  to  follow  the 
variation of the length scale factor R. The energies are conserved. Look at the invariance of the 
field equation, in which we take a cosmological constant equal to zero, while it does not refer to 
early Universe and short range gravitational interaction. 
 (8) 

S = " T 

 
It is divergenceless, which implies that the constant " must be an absolute constant. This last is 
classically determined through an expansion into a series of the metric,  the zero-order term being 
the time-independent Lorentz metric. We add a perturbation term which is also time-independent: 
(9)                                                                 g = % + & ’ 
 
We perform a Newtonian approximation (weak field, low velocities with respect to the speed of 
light). The constant is determined, identifying the linearized field equation to Poisson's equation. 
The expression depends on how we decide to write the tensor T. Let us follow [20], section 10.5: 
(10) 

Then the identification gives: 

(11)                                                             

 

T oo = ( 

The Einstein equation is invariant if  
(12)                                                                

 

 

 

 

 

9 

Notice that, when we determine the expression of Einstein's constant combining G an c in (11), 
this  does  not  imply  that  these  two  should  be  absolute  constants,  for  the  perturbation  method  is 
based on time-independent terms in the expansion into a series of the metric.  
Writing that the Schwarzschild length varies like R, we get:  

(13)                                           

                  

 

The conservation of the energy brings immediately:  

(14)                          

            

            

 

 
If we write the Planck length varies like R we get:  
(15) 

       

       

 

 
The invariance of the kinetic energy (or the fact that the Jeans length varies like R) gives: 

(16)                                                              

 

 
If we write that the radius of the circular orbit of the two masses orbiting around their common 
center of gravity varies like R, we get: 

(17)                                                                  
 
Remark that:  
(18)                                                                  R = c T 
 
Writing that the energy  h ) = h / *  is conserved we obtain: 

 

(19)                                                        
 
Notice this looks like a first link between quantum and gravitational worlds. Let us look now to 
electromagnetism. Write the Bohr radius varying like R:  
(20) 

 

          

 

We  can  complete  that,  assuming  that  the  fine-structure  constant #  does  not  vary  in  this  gauge 
evolution process:  

(21)                      

         &o = Constant         

 

 
This would be a consequence of the invariance of Maxwell's equations, coupled to the hypothesis 
of  the  electromagnetic  energy  conservation  [26].  Of  course  we  would  find  that  all  the 
characteristic lengths of electromagnetism (like the Debye length) vary like R, while the coulomb 
cross section varies like R2. Similarly all the characteristic times of physics are found to vary like 
the time scale factor T. This gives one gauge variation law keeping all equations invariant. 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

As we said, our goal is to justify the observed homogeneity of the early Universe without calling 
on  inflation  theory  to  rescue  the  model.  At  this  level  we  must  start  from  the  results  of  our 
bimetric  model,  presented  in  an  earlier  paper  [18].  We  recall  that  the  motivation  then  was  to 
clarify  the  nature  of  so-called  "dark  energy",  producing  the  late  acceleration  of  the  expansion 
process.  This  "component"  of  the  Universe  was  identified  with  a  second  kind  of  mass  and 
photons, possessing negative energy (notice that this bimetric model has nothing to do with other 
authors' works using this technique).  
 
5) Link with our bimetric model 
 
Let us give the basis of this bimetric model. We assume that the Universe contains two kinds of 
particles.  The  first,  with  positive  or  zero  mass  and  positive  energy,  follow  the  geodesics 
corresponding  to  a  first  metric  g  +.  The  second  ones,  with  negative  or  zero  mass  and  negative 
energy,  follow  the  geodesics  built  from  a  second  metric  g  -.  As  explained  in  the  reference 
mentioned, the two metrics are coupled through the following field equations:  
(22)                                                     S + (g +)  =  + (  T + - T  –)  
(23)                                                     S –  (g –)  =  + (  T  – - T +)  
 
Assuming  the  Universe  to  be  isotropic  and  homogeneous,  at  very  large  scale  we  introduce 
Robertson-Walker metrics, with their own length and time scale factors R + and  R –, which gives 
the two coupled differential equations: 
(24) 

 

 
The obvious divergence of the solution has been evoked to construe the observed acceleration. As 
the time-marker x° grows, the solutions become more and more divergent. The negative energy 
component behaves like repellent "dark energy" and accelerates our positive energy matter. But 
when  going  backwards  in  time,  the  two  scale  factors  get  the  same  value  and  follow  a  linear 
evolution in x°. If it is identified with a cosmic time t, through x° = ct, c being considered as an 
absolute constant, this evolution becomes so slow that all the hydrogen of the Universe would be 
converted into helium.  

Figure 6: The bimetric cosmological model ( R + , R – ) as functions of the time-marker x° 

 

 

 

 

 

11 

In figure 7 we have represented the evolution of our reference system, of two masses coupled by 
gravitation,  with  the  time-marker  x°.  At  the  very  begining  the  radius  of  the  orbit  follows  the 
growth of the length scale factor R. The two geodesics spiral along and around a cone. Then the 
symmetry  breaking  occurs.  The  portion  of  space  where  the  circular  orbit  is  located  is  in  a  non-
expanding region: the geodesics spiral along the length of a cylinder. We have illustrated in red 
the world-lines of co-moving particles. 

Figure 7: Red: world-lines (geodesics) of co-moving particles. Black: geodesics paths of the  

two masses linked by gravitational force. Before the symmetry breaking the Universe  

is homogeneous and the orbit grows like R. Then its radius becomes constant. 

 

 
 
Before 
We take k = 0 which takes flatness into account.  
(25)  

the  symmetry  breaking 

the 

(common)  metric 

is 

that  of  Robertson-Walker.  

 
Starting from a linear evolution of R versus x° we put the metric into a conformally flat form:  
(25) 

 
introducing the new time-marker  * = Log x° . Now we introduce the time scale factor T ( * )  

 

 

 

 

 

12 

 

(26)  

(29) 

 
Notice the null geodesics are basically gauge-invariant.  
Consider a given value of the time-marker *o and an interval $*  small enough to make possible 
to consider the functions c (* ), T (* ) et R (* ) as invariant. The line element can be written:  
(26):  

 
the functions being linked through: 
(27) 

R (*  o)  = C (*  o) T (*  o) 

 
During this short interval  (* o , * o + $ *) write:  
(28)  

t = T (* o) *       

r = R  (* o) u 

     

We  choose  (28)  as  a  definition  of  the  physical  time.  During  this  small  time  interval  
(* o , * o + $ *) we can write the following line element: 
(30) 

 
Using Cartesian coordinates:  
(31) 

 

 

 
Considering the null geodesics, we obtain the value c (*o) of the speed of light at the instant *o 
 
 
6) Solving the problem of the cosmological horizon 
 
Imagine that light propagates along the x direction. We have: 
(32) 

dx = c (%) dt 

 
 
Express all as functions of the length scale factor R:  
(33) 

       

     

The horizon is given by the integral:  
(34) 

 

 

 

 

       

    

 

 

 

 

13 

It  varies  like  the  length  scale  factor  R,  which  ensures  the  homogeneity  of  the  Universe  at  any 
time.  
As all this model goes with a Planck length varying like R (while the Planck time varies like T) 
we  see  that  the  Planck  barrier  disappears.  The  creation  of  this  Planck  barrier  is  due  to  the 
hypothesis that the constants of physics do not vary. Then we project the local and present aspect 
of microphysics towards the most distant past.  
 
7) About time 
 
What is time when we consider the very early state of the Universe, when all the particles cruise 
at relativistic velocities? How can we build a physical clock? If that is not possible, what is the 
meaning of a time that no one could measure? 
 
Let  us  go  back  to  our  system  composed  of  two  masses  circling  around  their  common  center  of 
gravity, now considered as an elementary clock. There is no absolute measurement of time, only 
a relative measure, a comparison of a duration with respect to a reference one. In any case a turn 
represents  some  sort  of  time  measurement.  Following  the  breadcrumbs  trail  that  is  the 
chronological time-marker x° we can count how many turns occur from a given instant X° to the 
value zero of x°.   
The period is t:  
(35) 

But:  
(36) 

G m = constant      

    

 

 
During a certain interval dx° of the chronological time-marker the number of turns increases by: 
(37) 

 

 

 
Between  x° = 0 and x° = X ° the number of turns is: 
(38) 

 

We  may  consider  a  turn  of  this  "elementary  clock"  as  an  "elementary  event".  From  a 
mathematical point of view, the Robertson-Walker solution starts from a zero value of the length 
scale  factor  R.  The  count  of  the  number  of  turns  of  our  "elementary  clock"  evokes  well  known  
Zeno's paradoxes.  
 
What  could  be  the  meaning  of  such  a  result?  It  seems  to  mean  that  when  we  go  backwards  in 
time,  towards  what  we  consider  as  an  origin  or  singularity,  an  infinite  number  or  "elementary 
events" occurs. Then the universe looks like a very peculiar book. The chronological time-marker 
x°  is  the  width  of  the  book.  As  we  flick  through  it  to  get  back  to  the  beginning,  its  pages  get 

 

 

 

 

 

14 

thinner  and  thinner.  An  infinity  of  pages  needs  to  be  flicked  through  to  get  to  the  start  of  the 
beginning, and we can never read the author's preface. 
 
 
8) The evolution of the constants of physics 
 
For the early Universe we have assumed that a symmetry breaking occurred during the radiation-
dominated era. Then the evolution was phrased through equations (12) to (21). A question arises. 
If there is a phase transition, when does it occur and why? We cannot answer the question at the 
present  time.  If  we  express  the  generalized  gauge  process,  choosing  the  density    of 
electromagnetic energy (which is dominant) as the "leading parameter", we obtain:  
(39) 

 
Just to fix ideas we can introduce some function which involves/some functions which involve a 
critical value of this density: (40) 

with: 
(41) 
 

we get: 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8: Compared evolutions of the constants of physics in the early universe 

 

 

 

 

15 

There are regions in the Universe where density can reach extremely high values: in the cores of 
neutron stars (in such a place it is as if the universe's evolution was going backward in time). The 
state of the matter in the core of the star is similar to that of the very early Universe). It could be 
interesting  to  consider  the  evolution  of  this  star  core  beyond  a  certain  density  value,  as 
accompanying an alteration of local physical constants, as local length and time scale factors. We 
speculate that this could modify the topology inside the core, bearing a hypertoric space bridge 
suitable  for  transfering  excess  matter  to  another  Universe.  Another  paper  will  discuss  this 
possibility, giving insights into the first work undertaken on this idea. 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
We started from the remark that the Robertson-Walker solution, assuming the cosmos is isotropic 
and homogeneous, does not describe the observed universe since it is clearly non-homogeneous, 
and  that  expansion  is  supposed  not  to  occur  within  the  vast  regions  occupied  by  galaxies.  We 
suggested this non-homogeneity was born from a symmetry breaking that happened in a distant 
past, where the three dimensional hypersurface lost its symmetry O(3).  
 
We  proposed  the  hypothesis  that  masses,  and  in  particular  a  couple  of  masses  m  linked  by 
gravitational  force  and  orbiting  around  their  common  center  of  gravity,  follow  the  geodesics  of 
the  four-dimensional  space-time  hypersurface.  We  have  shown  that  this  is  possible,  if  the 
equations  of  physics  are  to  keep  their  validity,  only  if  the  physical  constants  undergo  joint 
variations. 
  
We established the gauge variation laws linking them, as well as the length and time scale factors. 
We  obtained  a  description  of  cosmic  evolution  where  the  cosmological  horizon  varies  like  the 
length  scale  factor,  which  guarantees  the  homogeneity  of  the  early  Universe  without  calling  on 
the inflation theory.  
 
In this generalized gauge process, before the symmetry breaking occurs, all characteristic lengths 
of  physics  vary  like  the  length  scale  factor  R,  while  all  characteristic  times  vary  like  the  time 
scale factor T.  In this way the Plank barrier disappears.  
 
Focussing  on  our  two  mass  system  linked  by  gravitational  force,  we  assimilated  it  to  an 
elementary  clock  where  time  would  be  measured  by  each  turn  count.  After  the  symmetry 
breaking,  the number of turns evolves like classical cosmic time, following from x° = ct  with c 
being  an  absolute  constant.  We  have  shown  that  in  the  previous  era,  before  this  symmetry 
breaking, the elementary clock makes an infinite number of turns which brings up the problem of 
the definitions of "time" and of the "origin". 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Dr B. Kolev for useful advices and comments, J. Geffray 
and J. Murphy for the translation of the paper into English.  
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

References

16

[1]  J.P.  Petit  (Nov.  1988).  "An  interpretation  of  cosmological  model  with  variable light velocity".
Modern Physics Letters A, 3 (16): 1527.
[2] J.P. Petit (Dec. 1988). "Cosmological model with variable light velocity: the interpretation of red
shifts". Modern Physics Letters A, 3 (18): 1733.
[3] J.P. Petit, M. Viton (1989). "Gauge cosmological model with variable light velocity. Comparizon
with QSO observational data". Modern Physics Letters A, 4 (23): 2201–2210.
[4] J.P. Petit (1995). "Twin Universes Cosmology". Astronomy and Space Science (226): 273–307.
[5]  A.  Albrecht,  J.  Magueijo  (1999).  "A  time  varying  speed  of  light  as  a  solution  to cosmological
puzzles". Phys. Rev. D59. arXiv:astro-ph/9811018 
[6]  J.  Magueijo  (2003).  "Faster  Than  the  Speed  of  Light:  The  Story  of  a Scientific Speculation".
Perseus Books Group , Massachusetts. ISBN 0738205257
[7]  J.W.  Moffat  (1993).  "Superluminary  Universe:  A  Possible Solution to the Initial Value Problem
in Cosmology". Int. J. Mod. Phys. D2, 351–366. arXiv:gr-qc/9211020
[8] J.D. Barrow (July 24, 1999). "Is nothing sacred?". New Scientist 163 (2196): 28–32.
[9]  C.B.  Netterfield  et  al.  (2002).  "A  measurement  by  BOOMERANG  of  multiple  peaks  in the
angular  power  spectrum  of  the  cosmic  microwave  background".  Astrophys.  J.  (571): 604-614.
arXiv:astro-ph/0104460
[10]  C.L.  Bennet  et  al.  (2003).  "First  Year  Wilkinson  Microwave  Anisotropy  Probe  (WMAP)
Observations: Preliminary Maps and Basic Results". Astrophys.J.Suppl. 148. arXiv:astro-ph/0302207
[11]  G.  Amelino-Camelia  (2002).  "Doubly-Special  Relativity:  First  Results  and  Key Open
Problems". Int. J. of Mod. Phys. D11, 1643. arXiv:gr-qc/0210063
[12]  J.D.  Barrow  &  J.  Magueijo  (2000).  "Can  a  Changing  !  Explain the Supernovae Results?".
Astrophys. J. Lett. 532, L 87–90.
[13] M.A. Clayton, J.W.Moffat (1999). Phys. Lett. B (460): 263-270. arXiv:astro-ph/9907354
[14]  S.  Alexander  (2000).  "On  The  Varying  Speed  of  Light  in  a Brane-Induced FRW Universe".
JHEP 0011 017, arXiv:hep-th/9912037
[15] J. Magueijo (2001). "Stars and black holes in varying speed of light theories". Phys. Rev. D63,
043502.
[16]  J.  Magueijo,  L.  Smolin  (Dec.  18,  2001).  "Lorentz  invariance  with  an  invariant  energy  scale".
Phys.Rev.Lett. (88) 190403. arXiv:hep-th/0112090
[17]  B.A.  Basset,  S.  Liberati,  C.  Molina-Paris,  M.  Visser  (2000). "Geometrodynamics of Variable
Speed of light Cosmologies". Phys.Rev. D62 103518. arXiv:astro-ph/0001441
[18]  J.P.  Petit,  G.  d'Agostini  (August  2007).  "Bigravity  as  an  interpretation  of  the cosmic
acceleration".  CITV  (Colloque  International  sur  les  Techniques  Variationnelles,  tr. International
Meeting on Variational Techniques), Le Mont Dore. arXiv:math-ph/0712.0067
[19]  J.P.  Petit,  G.  d'Agostini  (August  2007).  "Bigravity:  A bimetric model of the Universe. Positive
and  negative  gravitational 
les  Techniques
Variationnelles,  tr.  International  Meeting  on  Variational Techniques),  Le  Mont  Dore.  arXiv:math-
ph/0801.1477
[20]  R.  Adler,  M.  Bazin,  M.  Schiffer  (1975).  "Introduction  to  General  Relativity", Mc-Graw Hill
Books Cie, 2nd edition. ISBN 0070004234
[21]  A.H.  Guth  (1981).  "Inflationary  universe:  A  possible  solution  to  the  horizon and flatness
problems". Phys. Rev. D 23 (2):347–356.
[22] A.D.  Linde  (1982).  "A  new  inflationary  universe  scenario:  A  possible  solution of the horizon,
flatness, homogeneity, isotropy and primordial monopole problems". Phys. Lett. B108, 1220.
[23]  A.  Albreicht,  P.  Steinhardt  (April  1982).  "Cosmology  for  Grand  Unified  Theories  with
Radiatively Induced Symmetry Breaking". Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 (17):1220–1223.
[24] A.D. Linde (1983). "The inflationary Universe". Phys. Lett. B 129, 177179.
[25] J.P. Petit (July 1994). "The missing mass problem". Il Nuovo Cimento B, 109: 697–710.
[26]  J.P.  Petit,  P.  Midy,  F. Landsheat (June 2001). "Twin  matter  against dark matter".  Intern. Meet.
on Astrophys. and Cosm. "Where is the matter?", Marseille, France.

International  sur 

lensings".  CITV 

(Colloque 

 

 

