Geometrization of matter and antimatter 

through coadjoint action of a group on its momentum space.

4: The Twin group. Geometrical description of Dirac's antimatter.

Geometrical interpretations of antimatter after Feynmann and so-called CPT-theorem.

Jean-Pierre Petit & Pierre Midy

Marseille Observatory, France

 

Abstract:

Starting from the work of reference [3] we modify the model, in order to avoid encounters between positive and negative mass
particles. The solution is to build a two-ten-dimensional folds (F, F*) as the quotient of the group by its orthochron sub-group.
Then we get two spaces with opposite arrows of time.

We study the impact of the different components of the group on momentum and movement spaces. One shows that the duality
matter-antimatter occurs in boths folds, in both universes. This work gives a new insight on antimatter, through geometrical tools.
For  an  example  Dirac's  antimatter  is  the  antimatter  of  our  own  fold.  The  matter  of  the  second  fold is CPT-symmetrical with
respect  to  ours.  The  PT-symmetrical  of  a  matter  particle  that  belongs  to  our fold is the antimatter of the other fold. Matter and
antimatter  particles  of  our  universe  own  positive  mass  and  energie.  Matter  and  antimatter  particles  of  the second fold own
negative mass and energy.

1- Introduction
In a former paper [1] we have introduced a geometrical definition of antimatter, through a ζ-symmetry. Charged mass-points are
supposed to move in a ten-dimensional space, with two sectors:

{ ζ i > 0 }: and { ζ i < 0 }

The first refers to the movement of matter and the second to the movement of antimatter.

By the way, photons follows the { ζ i = 0 } surface.

It looks like Plato's cavern. The play is supposed to take place in a ten dimensional theater and, inside a four dimensional cavern
called space time we observe 4d shadows, 4d movements.

In [1] we introduce a group which is an extension of the orthochron part of the Poincaré group. It makes possible to describe the
charges of the particles in terms of additional components of their moment. In the paper [2] the group is duplicated, through a ζ-
symmetry, which gives a geometric description of Dirac's antimatter. This last owns positive mass and energy.

Next step, paper [3], we decide to include antichron elements in the group. Then we get symmetries including T-symmetry, i.e.
PT-symmetry and  CPT-symmetry.  We  find  that  the  PT-symmetrical  of  a  particle of matter is  an  antiparticle,  as  suggested by
Feynmann. We find that the CPT-symmetric of a particle of matter is a particle of matter too, as asserted by the so-called "CPT-
theorem". But, from the coadjoint action of the group on the momentum components we find that these two own negative masses
and  energies.  Then  it is  no  longer  possible,  as  suggested  by  Feynmann,  to  identify  the PT-symmetry and  the  C-symmetry.
Similarly the CPT-symmetry is different from identity, for it reverses the mass. As pointed out in [3] a solution, suggested by the
mathematician J.M.Souriau [4] is to give up the antichron part of the Lorentz and Poincaré dynamical groups. But PT and CPT
symmetries dissapear.

In the following we suggest another solution.

2- Building a group acting on a two folds space

From [3] the action of our 16-dimensions group on a tend-dimensional space corresponds to:

and the corresponding coadjoint action is:

See computational details in the annex.We build the two-folds space as the quotient of the group by its orhochron sub-group.
From (1) a point of space is defined by:

{ ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 , ζ 5 , x , y , z , t }

Introduce a fold indix f = ± 1

The a point M of the first fold, called F, is defined by:

{ ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 , ζ 5 , ζ 5, x , y , z , t , f = +1 }

and the conjugated poit M*, which belongs to the second fold F*, by:

{ ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 , ζ 5 , ζ 5 , x , y , z , t , f = -1 }

We can write the new action:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

 

The  coadjoint  action  on  the  momentum  space  is  unchanged. But  the  interpretation  of  the  results  is  different.  Negative energy
movements occurs in another fold. Positive and negative energy particles cannot meet, for the move in distinct ten-dimensional
twin spaces.

 

 

 

Fig.1: Two sectors momentum space.  

Fig.2: Associated symmetries

 

 

Fig.3: The playing field: a two folds ( F and F*) space,

associated to a two sectors momentum space

( E > 0 and E < 0 ).

  
 

 

Fig.4: Movements of ordinary matter.

Action of orthochron elements of the group, with λ = 1.

Charges unchanged.

  
 

Fig. 5: Coadjoint action of a ( λ = -1 ; μ = 1 ) element of the group
on the momentum associated to the movement of normal matter:

the new movement corresponds to Dirac's antimatter.

On the figure 5 the line M1 figures the movement of normal, orthochron matter. We figures straight lines because ou group does
not take account of force field, like gravitational or electromagnétic field. It only runs the behaviour of lonely particles, charged
mass-points.
We choose an element in the grey area, corresponding to a ( λ = -1 ; μ = 1 ) matrix. The ( λ = - 1 ) value changes the signs of all
the ζ i. They become negative. The new path is in the second sector, corresponding to antimatter. As λ μ = - 1 the charges are
reversed. But as time is not reversed, the energy and the mass of the particle remains positive. This is a geometric description of
(orthochron) antimatter after Dirac.
Two more sectors has to be explored. On the third we examine the impact of ( λ = - 1 ; μ = - 1 ) element on the momentum and
movement.
( λ  =  -  1  )  reverses  the  {ζ  i}.  According  to our geometric definition this new movement corresponds to  antimatter,  for it takes
place in the second sector of space { ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 , ζ 5 , ζ 6, x, y , z , t }.
( μ = - 1 ) gives a PT-symmetry, reverses the signs of ( x, y , z , t )
But  (  λ  μ  =  +  1  )  keeps  the  charges  unchanged. This is "PT-symmetric antimatter", so  that  it  is  a  geometric description of
antimatter after Feynmann.

The movement takes place in the second space sector, in the fold F*. 

.
 

Fig.6: ( λ= -1 ; μ = -1 ) elements transform movement of normal matter

into movement of antimatter (ζ-symmetry) of PT-symmetrical object, runing bacward in time.

Geometric description of Feynmann's vision of antimatter.

Does not identify vompletely with Dirac's one: negative mass and negative energy.

  
The last elements correspond to the sector ( λ= 1 ; μ = -1 )
( λ = 1 ) --- > the movement is still in the matter's sector: no ζ-symmetry.
( μ = -1 ) goes with a PT-symmetry. The particle runs backward in time.
( λ = -1 ): C-symmetry. The charges are reversed.

This  is  CPT-symmetrical  matter,  so  that it corresponds to  a  geometrical  interpretation  of  the  so-called  "CPT theorem", which
asserts that the CPT-symmetric of a particle should be identical to that particle. That's not true. This movement corresponds to an
antichron movement. The particle goes backward in time, si that (coadjoint action) its mass and energy become negative.

The movement of a particle which is the CPT-symmetrical of a normal particle takes place in the fold F*.

 

.
 

 

Fig.7: ( λ = 1 ; μ = - 1 ) case. Corresponds to CPT-symmetry.

But the coadjoint action gives negative mass and energy.

The CPT-symmetric of a particle of matter is a particle of matter, but with negative mass.

 

 
 
 
 
 

Now, examine the impact on photons movement and moment. The ζ-symmetry has no impact on it: there is no "antiphoton". As
all the charges of the photon are zero a does not change it. It is identical to its antiparticle.

The  coadjoint  action  of  orthochron components modifies the  movement  and  the  moment  of  the photon, but keep unchanged its
energy. See figure 8. 
 

Fig. 8: Coadjoint action of orthochron elements

on photon's movement and moment.

.
 

 

   

.
 

Fig.9: The coadjoint action of antichron elements on photon's movement and moment,

reverses the photon energy: it travels backwards in time.

 

The antichron elements of the group acts on the momentum through coadjoint action. Such elements transform the normal photon,
travelling forward in time un the ζ = 0 plan of the fold F into a movement in the corresponding plane of the fold F*. This photon
travels backwards in time. Its energy is negative
 
 
 
 
 
 

.3- About the contents of the two folds

They can be summarized in the following tables.

 

.

.
.
 

Fig.10: Classical particles-antiparticles zoo.

Fig.11: Ghost particles-ghost-antiparticles zoo.

 

This last matrix is linked to the metric:

(7)

with

(8)

This last matrix is linked to the metric :

(9)

So that the two folds have same signature. If they are  described  as  Minkiwski  space  times,  their metrics are identical. But their
arrows of time are opposite. But their arrows of time are opposite.

If one wants to describe the two folds, the two universes, one have to choose his own arrow of time and space orientation.

It  is  clear  that  the duality matter-antimatter occurs in  both  folds.  If  we  call  the  second  fold "twin fols" (Sakharov) or "shadow
fold"  (Green,  Schwarz  and  Salam)  or  "ghost  fold"  (the  author's choice) the  arrow  of  time  in  this  second  fold  is  opposite (T-
symmetry), as predicted by A. Sakharov, and space structures are enantiomorphic (P-symmetry).

In the second fold the matter is CPT-symmetric with respect to ours. Whence, in that fold, a proton owns a negative charge and an
electron a positive charge. Conversely, an anti-electron of that fold, PT-symmetric with respect to ours, owns a negative charge,
whence an antiproton of the second fold has a positive charge. To sum up, the second fold is CPT symmetric with respect to ours.
As suggested by Andrei Sakharov, we can expect that the violation of the parity principle could be reversed in that fold. If the
absence  of  antimatter,  in  our  fold,  is  a  direct consequence  of  the  violation  of  the  parity  principle,  it  is  possible  that such
dissymmetry would be reversed in the other fold.  

All our work in astrophysics and cosmology comes from a system of two coupled field equations:

4- Interacting folds

(10)

(11)

S = χ ( T - T* )
S * = χ ( T* - T )

  
The two minus signs were introduced as an a priori hypothesis. At the end of this work, based on group theory, the explanation
arises. The two folds must have opposite arrows of time and must be enantiomorphic in order to fit constrainsts coming from the
group structure.

So that the other matter, located in the other fold, for an orbserver located in the first, bahaves as if it own a negative mass, which
comes from the coadjoint action and the T-symmetry.
 

Conclusion

Starting from the work of reference [3] we have modified the model, in order to avoir encounters between positive and negative
mass particles. The solution was to build a two-ten-dimensional folds (F,F*) as the quotient of the group by its orthochron sub-
group.

Then we get two spaces with opposite arrows of time.

We study the impact of the different components of the group on momentum and movement spaces. One shows that the duality
matter-antimatter occurs in boths folds, in both universes. This work gives a new insight on antimatter, through geometrical tools.

For an example Dirac's antimatter is the antimatter of our own fold.
The matter of the second fold is CPT-symmetrical with respect to ours.
The PT-symmetrical of a matter particle that belongs to our fold is the antimatter of the other fold.

Matter and antimatter particles of our universe own positive mass and energy.
Matter and antimatter particles of the second fold own negative mass and energy.

A N N E X

Extension of the group 
 
Consider a group Γ composed by matrixes:
(1)

A is a square matrix. B is a column matric and O a ligne matrix, composed by null terms. Consider the extension:
(2)

where ϑϑ is the following ligne sub-matrix:
(3)

ϑ being a scalar. Check that (2) is a group:
(4)

 

 

(5)

(6)

Then:
(7)

The inverse matrix is:
(8)

The element of the Lie algebra is:
(9)

Calculate the action of g3-1 on the element of the Lie algebra element δg3
(10)

(11)

γ is a matrix :
(12)

so that:
(13)

The identification:
(14)

 

gives:

gives:
(15)

(16)

The equation (16) is the action on the Lie algebra element, corresponding to the group Γ. The coadjoint action is the dual of this
action and is based on the invariance of a scalar. Call S this scalar from which one computes the coadjoint action of the group Γ on
its momentum. We compute the coadjoint action of the group g3 from the scalar:
(17)

Then the coadjoint action of the group g3 on its momentum is: 
(18)

χ δϑ + S

The moment of the group g3 is:
(19)

The extension of the group adds a component χ to the moment, which obeys (20). In particular, if Γ = g2 , i.e:
(20)

J = { χ , momentum of the group Γ }

its coadjoint action is:
(21)

(22)

(23)

χ' = λ μ χ

The equations (22) + (23) identifies to the coadjoint action of the Poincaré group when L is the neutral component of the Lorentz
group.

We know that we can put the momentum Jp of the Poincaré group gp into an antisymmetric matrix :
(24)

Then its action on this momentum is:
(25)

Then we can write:
(26)

and:
(27)

 

J = { χ , Jp }

χ' =λμχ

The Dimension of the Poincaré group is ten. The dimension of this extended group is eleven, due to adding the new variable φ . (
λ = ± 1 ) and ( μ = ± 1 ) are not new dimensions of the group.

This method can be extended as many times as one wants. Consider the following matrix:
(28)

The Poincaré group depends owns ten dimensions. The set

( φ1 ,φ2 , φ3 , φ4 , φ5 , φ5 )

adds si more dimensions. The scalar ( λ1 ,λ2 , λ3 , λ4 , λ5 , λ5 ) are fixed and do not correspond to new dimensions.

The coadjoint action of the group on its momentum
(29)

is:
(30)

 

J = { χ1 , χ2 , χ3 , χ4 , χ5 , χ6 , Jp }

χ'i = λi μ χi with i = { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 }

 

References

 

[1] J.P.Petit & P.Midy: Geometrization of matter and antimatter through coadjoint action of a group on its momentum space. 1:
Charges as additional scalar components of the momentum of a group acting on a 10d-space. Geometrical definition of antimatter.
Preprint, March 1998.
[2] J.P.Petit & P.Midy: Geometrization of matter and antimatter through coadjoint action of a group on its momentum space. 2:
Geometrical description of Dirac's antimatter. Preprint, March 1998.
[3] J.P.Petit & P.Midy: Geometrization of matter and antimatter through coadjoint action of a group on its momentum space. 3:
Geometrical description of Dirac's antimatter. A first geometrical interpretation of antimatter after Feynmann and so-called CPT-
theorem. Preprint, March 1998. 
[4] J.M. Souriau: Structure des Systèmes Dynamiques, Dunod, Ed. 1972 (in French); tr. "Structures of Dynamical Systems",
Birkhauser, 1997. ISBN 0817636951.
[5] J.M.Souriau: Géométrie et relativité. Ed. Hermann-France, 1964. 
[6] P.M. Dirac: "A theory of protons and electrons", Dec. 6th 1929, published in Proceedings of Royal Society (London), 1930: A
126, pp. 360–365
[7] R.Feynman: "The reason for antiparticles" in Elementary particles and the laws of physics. Cambridge University Press, 1987.
 

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by french CNRS and Brevets et Développements Dreyer company, France. 
Déposé sous pli cacheté à l'Académie des Sciences de Paris, 1998. 
© French Academy of Sciences, Paris, 1998.

