1

Negative energy states and interstellar travel

Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Marseille (LAM), CNRS, France

Jean-Pierre Petit∗

Nathalie Debergh†

Haute Ecole Charlemagne, Belgium

Gilles d’Agostini‡

Independent researcher, France

This presentation is an overview of the possibilities of negative energy states
in cosmology and astrophysics as well as quantum mechanics, and their
relation to a novel speciﬁc way to reach stars in journeys much shorter than
a human lifetime, in an apparent faster-than-light (FTL) travel involving
properties of spacetime that are diﬀerent than what has usually been consid-
ered with warp drives and wormholes. We start by some remarks about
the importance of Mach’s principle, and how Mach eﬀects, through frame-
dragging and the theoretical possibility to produce large amounts of negative
mass, may be related to our own work presented in the second part: the
Janus cosmological model (JMC), a relativistic bimetric theory of gravity
describing the universe as a 4D hypersurface with two conjugate metrics,
solutions of two coupled ﬁeld equations. The model, which reintroduces
negative mass in cosmology with no paradox, is based on the work of Albert
Einstein in general relativity, Andrei Sakharov in cosmology and particles
physics, and Jean-Marie Souriau in dynamical group theory. After half a
century of continuous developments, the Janus model is now a sound alterna-
tive to the dominant ΛCDM model, as it explains the universe without
resorting to inﬂation, dark matter nor dark energy, and is in very good
agreement with latest observational data. All these aforementioned concepts
allow the presentation,
in a third part, of the theoretical possibility of
apparent FTL interstellar travel, as the negative sector involves distances
a hundred times shorter and a speed of light ten times higher. We show our
geometric interpretation of the hyperspace transfer and speculate that an
interstellar spaceship which could invert its mass would not even need any
engine to cruise at relativistic speeds, taking advantage of the energy discrep-
ancy of the two sectors. This would make closest stellar systems reachable
in a matter of days or months. We ﬁnally conclude that engineering mass
inversion requires modeling the process at the atomic level, i.e. extending
quantum ﬁeld theory to negative energy states.

astrophysics and cosmology (retired) – jp.petit@mailaps.org

∗Ph.D in kinetic theory of gases and plasma physics. Specialist in magnetohydrodynamics, topology,
†Ph.D in mathematics. Research in cosmology, quantum physics and applied mathematics –
‡Ph.D in particle physics. Research in cosmology and high energy physics –

nathalie.debergh@hech.be

dagostinigilles@mailaps.org

2

Introduction

Lack of funding did not allow us to physically attend the 2018 Estes Park Advanced
Propulsion Workshop. So we produced a short video presentation [1] that has been
broadcasted to attendees, 14 September 2018.

The video is English spoken but English subtitles are also available for best under-
standing. It was a bit diﬃcult to choose which work should be presented during the
meeting, as the underlying model has been at work for decades. 20 years as regards
Gilles d’Agostini, and 52 years for Jean-Pierre Petit. Various subjects which may have
disconcerted some of the attendees. We’ll start by a remark regarding a discovery re-
cently reported in Nature.

Part 1: Revival of Mach’s principle

Laniakea, the Dipole Repeller and the CMB

Four researchers: American astronomer R. Brent Tully, Israeli astrophysicist Yehuda
Hoﬀman, and French astrophysicists H´el`ene Courtois and Daniel Pomar`ede, presented
the results in [2] and [3] of a large survey of Laniakea, the supercluster that is home to
our Milky Way and about 100,000 nearby galaxies. This discovery was made possible
thanks to a group work involving many researchers and technicians.

Objects in the universe, like galaxies seen at a cosmological scale, emit light that
undergoes a redshift telling the universe is expanding, as observed by American as-
tronomer Edwin Hubble, giving the famous law that bears his name.

Therefore, this Doppler shift-measured velocity of galaxies receding from the Earth
gives a radial velocity ﬁeld, or Hubble ﬁeld, which shows, from our point of view, a
strong isotropy (to the point that this isotropy has been raised as a cosmological princi-
ple) and velocities proportional to the distance of such galaxies far away from the Earth.

Due to the improvement of observational techniques, measurements of recession ve-

locities now reach 10,000 km/s.

The four aforementioned researchers had the idea to establish a map of velocities of
these galaxies based on their proper velocity, i.e. subtracting this Hubble ﬁeld from the
value of the recession velocity of galaxies, which is deduced from their redshift. This
allowed them to retrieve a ﬁrst approach of their motion with respect to the universe
as a whole.

An interpretation was then given to the CMB (Cosmic Microwave Background)

anisotropy.

Figure 1 is a map of the entire celestial sphere. There are two regions: one with an

excess of redshift and the other with an excess of blueshift.

3

Fig. 1 – The CMB dipole.

The two points A and B in ﬁgure 2 are simply diametrically opposed in space:

Fig. 2 – Two diametrically opposed points in the celestial sphere.

They consider that the CMB, this primitive radiation background, represents the
universe itself, with respect to which the system measuring these redshifts would move.
It is then possible to cancel this motion, assuming that the recording system is located
in a frame of reference animated with a speed directed along the AB axis. We would
then obtain the map in ﬁgure 3.

Fig. 3 – No anisotropy in the appropriate reference frame.

The anisotropy has gone. The calculated speed is 631 km/s, that of our galaxy
with respect to the CMB, i.e. with respect to the universe itself in a certain sense.
We thus get in touch with the revival of Mach’s principle, according to which space
and matter constitute one and the same entity. At a given moment, in a given place,
the concept of absolute immobility makes sense: an observer, animated by a speed of
631 km/s with respect to the Earth in the right direction, would cancel any anisotropy
in his measurements of the CMB. He would therefore be “immobile with respect to the
universe itself”.

4

How to interpret Mach’s principle?

That question is central. We have no absolute or deﬁnitive answer and the following
is subject to discussion. If space is tightly related to matter, is this bond global (grav-
itational interaction with the distant matter in the whole universe) or only local (like
general relativity seems to suggest at ﬁrst)?

This is a conjecture: we answer “both at once”.

We indeed think that Mach’s principle involves all the content of the universe,
through some kind of integration. Of course there are, in the neighborhood of ev-
ery observer, masses nearby. For example, the mass of the Earth is close to an earthly
observer. Then, is space “bound” to Earth? Or even to more massive objects a bit more
distant but “close enough”, like the Sun? Or even the entire galaxy? If that were the
case, such bond would be revealed by frame-dragging eﬀects. It is not.

Hence, we think that the local inertial interaction between spacetime and energy-
matter is negligible. On the other hand, what determines this space-matter link is the
integration of all the masses present in the causally connected universe. This global
relationship is then stronger.

The local interaction should however reappear where the density of matter becomes
very high, for example in the vicinity of pulsars, i.e. neutron stars spinning at high
velocities, with some visible gravitomagnetic frame-dragging eﬀect (Lense-Thirring pre-
cession).

If this vision about Mach’s principle and Mach eﬀects is not ﬂawed – and we would
like to understand yours – then the result of observations from Tully, Hoﬀman, Cour-
tois and Pomar`ede suggests the following aspect. To each observer is associated a clock
which gives his proper time. The rate of temporal ﬂow from the clock of this “motion-
less” observer should therefore be greater than the rate of another clock associated with
any other “mobile” observer with respect to the universe.

This idea seems in contradiction with special relativity, which states that there is
no preferred frame of reference. But special relativity refers to a Minkowski spacetime,
which is an empty universe, without matter, with no gravity. It excludes Mach’s prin-
ciple.

About the “twin paradox”, a thought experiment stated by French physicist Paul
Langevin in 1911. It involves twin brothers: one would stay on Earth, while the other
would go on a trip in a spaceship up to relativistic speeds. When he’s back, asked
Langevin, who has aged the most?

According to special relativity, the brother who stayed immobile (or has moved
slowly with respect to the speed of light) is the one who has aged the most. The twin
who had traveled at a relativistic speed from the origin of the local frame of reference
(the Earth) would have had the slowest rate of proper time.

Admittedly, Langevin asks, but which brother moved, and which stayed immobile?
From the Earth point of view, the traveler moved. But we could instead think that it

5

is the Earth, and the twin on it, which have accelerated away from the spaceship.

Whatever, it is not the Earth that should be taken into consideration, nor even the
galaxy. Both move with respect to the “local group”. Earth orbits the Sun. But the
Sun accompanies the rotational motion of the galaxy so the solar system, in turn, is
animated by a galactic orbital speed of 230 km/s. What gives?

If our interpretation of the Laniakea results is right, our galaxy moves at a velocity
of 631 km/s with respect to space as a whole. Yet, it is not a relativistic speed, as it is
almost three orders of magnitude lower. We should be more speciﬁc. The one who “ages
the least” is the one who moves at a greater speed compared to space in general. If we
consider that the twin traveler left on a trip at a speed of 200,000 km/s for example, this
is about 300 times more than the galaxy drift of 631 km/s with respect to the CMB. So
we can neglect this “proper motion of the Earth with respect to space” (very close to
those 631 km/s), regardless of the direction in which the twin traveler made his round
trip. So we deduce that it is the twin left on Earth that will have aged the most.

According to this view, Mach’s principle would disrupt fundamentals of general
relativity, which is based on the principle that any solution to the Einstein ﬁeld equations
can be expressed in any arbitrary coordinate system. Such an idea should be debated
to separate the wheat from the chaﬀ.

Frame-dragging

The “rotating black hole” model is based on the Kerr metric, which induces a rotational
(azimuthal) frame-dragging or Lense-Thirring eﬀect in the ergosphere. See for example
in the classical GR book [4]:

“A very interesting physical eﬀect results from the rotational nature of the Kerr so-
lution, a body in geodesic motion experiences a force proportional to the parameter
a, reminiscent of a Coriolis force. Loosely speaking, we may think of the rotating
source as “dragging” space around it; in a Machian sense the source “competes”
with the Lorentzian boundary conditions at inﬁnity in the establishment of a local
inertial frame.”

But this azimuthal frame-dragging has a peculiar aspect: the speed of light does not
have the same value according to whether one accompanies the rotational movement or
that one travels in the opposite direction!

Just as the well-known exterior Schwarzschild metric [5] goes with a less known inte-
rior solution [6] (both written in 1916 by Karl Schwarzschild himself)1 which describes
the geometry within a spherical body of constant density, the Kerr metric is actually an
“exterior solution” that should be supplemented by an “interior Kerr solution” describ-
ing the geometry of a mass in rotation, which has not been done yet. It is such mass
that is the “source of the ﬁeld” and which “drags space with it”.

1See also [7] and [8] for an in-depth analysis of these two metric solutions and [9] for a black hole

model with cancellation of the central singularity and mass inversion process.

6

This “azimuthal frame-dragging” is quite well documented but we have been partic-
ularly interested recently in [8] in a radial frame-dragging produced in spacetime by the
collapse of a destabilized neutron star, and the innovative consequences that this eﬀect,
which has been apparently neglected so far in the scientiﬁc literature, could bring to
the classical black hole model and interstellar travel.

We think that Mach’s principle in cosmology in [10] and the theoretical possibility to
make large amounts of negative mass according to Mach eﬀects in [11] could represent
a bridge between this work and ours. We hope that positive discussion will result from
the series of Estes Park Advanced Propulsion Workshops, insofar as Mach’s principle is
in our eyes something absolutely essential.

Part 2: Reintroduction of negative mass

in cosmology and astrophysics

A few words about modern cosmology

Astrophysics and cosmology have undergone increasing challenges for decades.

In 1989, ﬁrst results from the COBE satellite showed that the early universe was
remarkably homogeneous, within 10−5. This was a bit paradoxical because, before that
era particles were moving away from each other at velocities greater than the speed of
light. It will be noted that, according to the mainstream cosmological model, near t = 0
these particles even move away from each other at an inﬁnite speed.

Indeed, if we consider the emission of an electromagnetic wave from these particles
at t = 0, which propagates at the speed of light c, this spherical wave has a radius ct
that will catch up the distance R between particles only later on.

Fig. 4 – Particles cannot communicate at t < th.

The current concordance cosmological model negotiates this paradox by invoking an
inﬂation occurring at 10−36 second after the Big Bang, according to which the universe
would have exponentially expanded by a factor of 1026 (or maybe even more) during
only 10−33 second. Origin of this phenomenon: a hypothetical scalar ﬁeld associated
with a particle, not described: the inﬂaton.

7

When astrophysicists discovered that general relativity could not explain the ﬂat-
ness, remotely, of galaxy rotation curves and why galaxies and galaxy clusters didn’t
explode by centrifugal force (as they orbit much too fast given the amount of matter
detected within them), as well as strong gravitational lensing eﬀects, this “missing mass
problem” conducted cosmologists to add another invisible ingredient of unknown na-
ture: dark matter.

Finally, in 1997 two independent teams discovered then reported in [12] and [13]
that the expansion of the universe is actually accelerating. This led in 2011 to the
award of the Nobel Prize in physics to astrophysicists Saul Perlmutter, Adam G. Riess
and Brian P. Schmidt. Although Riess admitted in his Nobel lecture [14] that his
discovery immediately implied the presence of a negative mass density in the universe,
he dismissed such possibility as “obviously unphysical” and arbitrary chose to resort
to the old-fashioned cosmological constant,2 put back in the Einstein ﬁeld equations to
account for this puzzling eﬀect. Such exotic “repulsive power of the vacuum” conducted
cosmologists to call for a third unidentiﬁed ingredient in the dominant model: dark
energy.

Fig. 5 – Perlmutter, Riess and Schmidt, Nobel Prize in Physics 2011.

Fig. 6 – Observed acceleration of the cosmic expansion

versus a prior classical Friedmann equation.

2Which has no counterpart in classical physics. The Einstein ﬁeld equations secrete many laws
of physics (e.g. Newton’s law of universal gravitation, the Vlasov-Poisson equation, Euler’s equations
of ﬂuid dynamics. . . ) but nobody can justify the presence of the cosmological constant in the ﬁeld
equations. In other words, it has no physical meaning.

8

Negative mass and the preposterous runaway motion

Early on, physicists tried to introduce negative masses in cosmology, based on the
Einstein ﬁeld equations:

Rµν − 1

2 R gµν + Λ gµν = χ Tµν

Einstein’s equation has a metric solution, from which the geodesics can be calcu-
lated, giving the trajectories followed by particles. RHS, the stress-energy tensor Tµν.
When the ﬁeld is created by ordinary matter and the particle velocities are weak with
respect to the speed of light, this tensor contains only one term, proportional to the
density of matter ρ.

Geodesics can be calculated around a spherical mass of constant density. This gives
two connected sets of geodesics (lying within this mass, and outside). The result is that
a positive mass generates geodesics that express the classical gravitational attraction
and that a negative mass (ρ changed to −ρ) on the contrary evokes gravitational repul-
sion.

Anglo-Austrian physicist Hermann Bondi showed in 1957 in [15] that, since both
positive and negative masses would follow the same geodesics (as there is one metric
tensor gµν in the Einstein ﬁeld equations):

• Positive mass attracts anything.
• Negative mass repels anything.

Bondi also showed that when a positive mass encounters a negative mass, a peculiar
phenomenon would arise, called the runaway motion. Such interaction laws and this
runaway eﬀect are illustrated in ﬁgure 7:

A

Positive mass

attracts

positive mass

B

Positive mass runs away

and negative mass

chases it

C

Negative mass

repels

negative mass

Fig. 7 – Newtonian interaction laws according to Einstein’s equations.

In ﬁgure 7(B) the positive mass, repelled by the antigravitational potential of the
negative mass, runs away from it, while the negative mass falls into the gravity well of
the positive mass and chases it. The couple is then uniformly accelerated, but the total
energy stays constant, because the kinetic energy associated with the negative mass is
negative!

Such interaction between particles with opposite masses violates the action-reaction
principle. Note that this is based on the fact that test particles with a positive or a neg-
ative passive gravitational mass would behave the same way when they are embedded

9

in a gravitational potential created by a large positive mass M.

This has precluded any consideration of negative mass in astrophysics and cosmol-
ogy for 60 years. For that matter, British astrophysicist William B. Bonnor wrote in [16]:

“I regard the runaway (or self-accelerating) motion [...] as so preposterous that I
prefer to rule it out by supposing that inertial mass is all positive or all negative.”

Two coupled ﬁeld equations: the Janus cosmological model

If we want to consider something that works, we need two metrics g
from
which two diﬀerent families of geodesics are calculated, referring to positive mass par-
ticles and negative mass particles, respectively. From these metrics, we calculate Ricci
tensors R

(−)
µν as well as Ricci scalars R(+) and R(−).

(+)
µν and R

(+)
µν and g

(−)
µν

This is the core of the Janus cosmological model, which describes the universe as
a Riemannian manifold associated to two coupled metrics, populated by positive and
negative mass species.3

These solutions come from a system of two coupled ﬁeld equations, built from a

Lagrangian derivation [24] (see also [25]):

µν − 1
R(+)

2 R(+)g(+)

µν = χ

T (+)
µν +

g(−)
g(+) T (−)

µν

s

"
"s

#
#

µν − 1
R(−)

2 R(−)g(−)

µν = −χ

g(+)
g(−) T (+)

µν + T (−)

µν

General relativity reduces to Newtonian gravity in the limit of weak gravitational
potential and low velocities with respect to the speed of light, so that Newton’s law of
universal gravitation can be found from the Newtonian approximation of the Einstein
ﬁeld equations.

Likewise, our system of two coupled ﬁeld equations provides the following interaction

laws (proportional to 1/r2):

• Positive masses mutually attract.
• Positive mass and negative mass mutually repel.
• Negative masses mutually attract.

3The Janus model has been popularized in two science comic books [17] and [18] available freely,
as well as an ongoing video series [19] on YouTube, subtitled in English. A website [20] is dedicated to
popularize the model and gather useful bibliography. Papers [21], [22] and [23] are a good introduction
to the model in the peer-reviewed literature.

10

A

Positive mass

attracts

positive mass

B

Positive mass

and negative mass
repel each other

C

Negative mass

attracts

negative mass

Fig. 8 – Newtonian interaction laws according to two coupled ﬁeld equations.

In ﬁgure 8(B) there is no preposterous runaway motion anymore. The action-reaction

principle is restored.

By the way, as negative masses mutually attract and don’t repel, they can also form
conglomerates through gravitational instability, like positive masses. Which they do:
negative mass matter, repelled by positive mass, is essentially concentrated in the mid-
dle of apparent giant voids between galaxies.

Such negative mass matter appears optically invisible in the universe, because it
so

emits negative energy photons that follow null geodesics of their own metric g
they cannot be detected by telescopes made of positive mass matter.

(−)
µν

The two coupled ﬁeld equations of the Janus model reduce to the Einstein ﬁeld
equations of general relativity for regions of spacetime where positive mass density
largely dominates, i.e. where almost all negative mass has been repelled away by local
concentration of positive mass matter, e.g. on Earth or in the solar system. Therefore,
the Janus cosmological model ﬁts with local relativistic observations and measurements.

CPT symmetry and negative energy states

In 1967, Russian nuclear physicist Andrei Sakharov was the ﬁrst to address the baryon
asymmetry of the universe, i.e.
the missing primordial antimatter, considering the
universe was made of two entities with opposite arrows of time (T-symmetry) on both
“sides” of the Big Bang, originating from the same initial singularity and having opposite
CP violation, realizing a complete CPT symmetry of the universe (see [26] and [27]).

Fig. 9 – 2D representation of Sakharov’s twin universes in CPT symmetry

(opposite charge conjugation, parity and arrow of time).

11

In 1970, French mathematician Jean-Marie Souriau introduced the concept of coad-
joint action of a group on its moment map, after the coadjoint orbit method of sym-
plectic geometry [28]. He showed that particles are the motion of the relativistic mass-
point ruled by the complete Poincar´e group, which has an orthochronous (forward-in-
time) subset and an antichronous (backward-in-time) subset. Dynamical group the-
ory makes possible to deﬁne physically observables quantities like energy, momentum,
spin. . . which emerge as pure geometrical objects. Subsequently, Souriau showed in
[29] that the physical signiﬁcation of time reversal is actually energy inversion (hence
negative mass, as −m = −E/c2).

The Janus cosmological model combines Sakharov’s and Souriau’s work to make the
two sectors of spacetime interact through gravitation, as T-symmetry of the negative
sector reverses the energy and mass of its particles.

The particular topology of the universe, with two interacting opposite sectors on the

same two-sided 4D hypersurface, is illustrated as a 2D representation in ﬁgure 10:

Fig. 10 – 2D representation of the universe in the Janus cosmological model.

Two spacetimes are folded one over the other, forming a single two-sided surface.

Sakharov’s twin universe is then nothing but the negative energy content of the uni-
verse. In such an antichronous sector, due to CPT symmetry the antimatter dominates
and has a negative mass. Opposite situation in our orthochronous sector, where matter
dominates and has a positive mass.

Basically, there are two kinds of antimatter:
• One is C-symmetric with respect to ordinary matter. We may call it Dirac’s
antimatter. It is the antimatter made in the lab, and since it has a positive energy
and mass, it falls down in the Earth gravitational ﬁeld.

• The second is PT-symmetric with respect to ordinary matter. We may call it
Feynman’s antimatter.4
It is the missing primeval antimatter, and due to T-
symmetry it appears invisible to us and “falls up” in the Earth gravitational ﬁeld.
4Richard Feynman stated than an antiparticle (C-symmetry) would be indistinguishable from the
image in a mirror (P-symmetry) of its particle running backward in time (T-symmetry). This is related
to the CPT theorem, which claims that the CPT symmetry of a particle is the very same as that particle.
But the CPT theorem is an axiom valid in a world where only positive energy states can exist. Since
T-symmetry reverses the energy of a particle, the CPT theorem must be reconsidered.

12

We made a lengthy presentation of these geometrical ideas related to dynamical
group theory in [30] and [31], including the geometrical description of electric charges in
[32] which extends the Janus model to a 5D hypersurface, with Kaluza’s ﬁfth dimension
managing electric charges, thus the matter-antimatter duality.

Janus model vs ΛCDM model

The Janus cosmological model is a falsiﬁable and successful theory in very good agree-
ment with latest observational data, as shown in [23]. It is a sound competitor of the
mainstream ΛCDM model and its six free parameters, as it explains the formation,
shape and conﬁnement of galaxies and their ﬂat rotation curves, as well as high random
velocities of galaxies in clusters; strong gravitational lensing eﬀects; and the lacunar
large-scale structure of the universe, with galaxies distributed around giant repulsive
cosmic voids [3] unexplainable by classical theory.5 All these eﬀects on positive mass
matter can be attributed to its gravitational interaction with antimatter of negative
mass, instead of dark matter of positive mass of unknown nature. Although negative
mass is also invisible, its components are perfectly identiﬁed.6

The Janus model also shows why the unidentiﬁed “dark energy”, due to the addition
of a non-zero cosmological constant to the Einstein ﬁeld equations and the subsequent
repulsive power of the vacuum, is unphysical. Instead, the Janus model explains the
accelerating cosmic expansion as being caused by the negative pressure due to the over-
all negative mass density content of the universe, with no cosmological constant and an
exact solution [21] in agreement with observations.

As for the question of the great isotropy and homogeneity of the early universe,
justiﬁed by the inﬂation (which is often said to be the sole viable hypothesis), the main
author was the ﬁrst in 1988 to introduce a variable speed of light (VSL) in cosmology,
actually a joint variation of all physical constants according to a universal gauge relation-
ship, letting the laws of physics invariant. Such joint variation was initially considered
as a slow secular drift in [33] and [34], which has been restricted in later developments to
the radiation-dominated era with a conformally ﬂat metric, as described in [30] then [22].

Note that at the “Janus Point” t = 0, the speed of light as well as entropy become
inﬁnite, allowing the light cone to become ﬂat, which then reverses “like an umbrella
turning inside-out in a gust of wind” accompanied by the direction of the arrow of time,
at t < 0.

Finally, the Janus cosmological model has a diﬀerent take on the cosmic microwave
background. CMB ﬂuctuations are a major claim justifying the ΛCDM model, as ob-
5About the Dipole Repeller [3]: Although an arbitrary void in a simulation of a uniform distribution
of positive mass matter is classically shown to produce a repulsive gravitational eﬀect, as if it was a
concentration of negative mass instead (and thus both possibilities are considered equivalent), in reality
the Jeans instability is only able to produce matter conglomerates, not voids. So the presence of such
voids in the universe cannot be classically explained.

6The invisible components of the universe are made of the same antiparticles as those found in
our positive energy world: photon, antiprotons, antineutrons, positrons, antineutrinos. . . but with a
negative energy (and a negative mass if they own one) due to CPT-symmetry and opposite CP violation
in the negative sector. The physics of such a negative world is the same as ours, ruled by the Einstein,
Boltzmann, Maxwell, Schr¨odinger equations. . . with negative mass and negative energy states.

servations are in a fairly good accordance with its predictions (spectral analysis of
ﬂuctuations). In the Janus cosmological model, the tiny ﬂuctuations in the CMB are,
according to [35], primeval imprints of the negative sector on the early universe. In-
cidentally, these CMB ﬂuctuations are directly related to the possibility of interstellar
travels, main purpose of this presentation.

13

Part 3: Making interstellar travel possible

An express subway in the universe

The Janus model presents various aspects. Geometrically, we can represent the universe
as a 4D hypersurface having a frontside and a backside, and where measured distances
would be diﬀerent depending on whether geodesic paths are drawn on the frontside
(−)
µν ). Details are available in the various ref-
(metric g
erences cited in the Part 2 of this presentation.

(+)
µν ) or on the backside (metric g

Fig. 11 – A single 2D surface with two diﬀerent scales.

If we consider two faraway points A and B in spacetime:
• Travel distances are diﬀerent according to whether the trajectories occur on the
frontside (positive sector) or on the backside (negative sector). Distances covered
by a vehicle of negative mass are actually 100 times shorter.

• The speed of light c(−) is ten times higher than the speed of light c(+).

Therefore, travel time savings become three orders of magnitude lower than a classi-
cal trip if the vehicle, having reversed its mass, travels along the geodesics of the metric
(−)
µν (see [22] and [35]).
g

If it is possible to trigger and control a mass inversion process (and we think it is
the case, as it should occur naturally in the universe in destabilized neutron stars, as
suggested in [7], [8] and [9]), planetary systems located a few tens of light-years away
would then become easily accessible.

14

No need for an engine: the Gulliver eﬀect

Let’s suppose we ﬁnd a way to invert the mass of a spaceship. It would immediately
disappear from our eyes while being transferred in the negative sector, where distances
are considerably shorter and the speed limit higher. But what about the engine? What
kind of thruster could be used to accelerate at a signiﬁcant fraction of c(−)? How to
reach the stars?

A vehicle and its passengers are an ensemble of particles of mass m. The size of these
particles can be likened to their Compton wavelength, which represents their “spatial
extension”:

λc = h
mc

Fig. 12 – Didactic image of the Compton wavelength of a particle.

We will see in the next section the geometrical aspect of mass inversion. If we assume
that a ship and its crew are transferred to this “backside of the universe” they will ﬁnd
themselves among the content of the negative sector, i.e. among particles of negative
energy.7

Due to the very diﬀerent space scale factors of the positive sector vs negative sector

according to [35]:

a(−)
a(+) ≈ 1
100

Surrounding negative energy particles will appear a hundred times smaller with
respect to the particles of the spaceship that are suddenly grafted in this negative
sector.

Fig. 13 – A particle transferred in the negative sector

appears bigger than surrounding particles.

If we assume that such hyperspace transfer implies energy conservation, wavelengths
associated to particles have to be comparable. This will be veriﬁed if the ship appears
7More precisely (as said earlier in the part dedicated to CPT symmetry): among antiparticles

(antiprotons, antineutrons, positrons, etc.) of negative energy and negative mass.

15

in the negative sector at a relativistic speed, which goes with a shortening (Lorentz
contraction) by a factor of 100. Thus, a particle whose mass m is reversed transfers in
the negative sector and would ﬁnd itself animated with a relativistic speed very close
to three million kilometers per second8 (but still always less than this upper limit).

Therefore, the spaceship would not need any thruster to accelerate. The spaceship

is the engine.

We speculate that without some kind of prior manipulation, transferring n particles
would give them all relativistic speeds, but maybe in random directions. The spaceship
would then instantly explode after transfer, converting its whole mass in energy.

We think intuitively – but cannot currently justify it – that such harm could be
avoided by aligning spins of particles the ship is made of, using a powerful uniform
magnetic ﬁeld just before mass inversion. The magnetic ﬁeld vector would therefore
correspond to the desired cruise direction in the negative sector. After a new transfer
from the negative to the positive sector this time, this same set of particles gets back to
its initial kinematic parameters, with a slow velocity with respect to the speed of light.
The concepts of acceleration and deceleration would thus lose their meaning. No risk
of any “raspberry jam delta-v” for the crew.

Along an interstellar journey through the negative sector which has no star, no planet
and no life,9 a ship could occasionally “resurface” and adjust its trajectory, locating its
position in the galaxy from known distant light sources, using for example a three-
dimensional map of identiﬁed pulsars as “deep space lighthouses” usable for navigation.

Geometrical interpretation of hyperspace transfer by mass inversion

We conjecture that a mass inversion would be possible by concentrating energy in a thin
shell around the craft made of atoms whose nuclei have a metastable excitation level of
great lifetime. The process is illustrated by the following sequence of drawings. In this
2D analogy showing two separate folds, the vehicle becomes a closed contour line, as
shown in ﬁgure 14.

Fig. 14 – The vehicle and its passenger in our sector.

8Or 1.86 million miles per second in imperial units.

9Stellar nucleosynthesis never occurred – and never will – in the negative sector, hence no chemical
elements heavier than antihydrogen, antihelium and antilithium. The negative sector is indeed in a
much contracted state and hotter than the positive sector, and calculations show its hot gas clouds
will never coalesce to form stars, as the cooling time of this sector is equal to the age of the universe.
If the ship could slow down and had a window through which passengers could watch their outside
environment, they would distinguish in the distance vague reddish gas nebulae radiating in the near-
infrared spectrum.

16

The darker area at the bottom is not a “parallel universe” as you might think at
ﬁrst, but the negative sector which is the backside of the same surface upside-down,
seen from underneath. See it as a mirror laying below the upper sheet. Figure 15 shows
what we are aiming by a mass inversion:

Fig. 15 – The vehicle and its passenger transferred in the conjugate sector.

Concentrating energy increases the local curvature of spacetime. Let the following

spacecraft, seen more closely:

Fig. 16 – Step 1: the craft lays in our positive sector.

Let’s split this image and keep only half of it, so the curvature is easier to see:

Fig. 17 – Image cut in half for better visualization.

Energy is focused along the periphery of the craft. Mass-energy in our sector induces
a local positive curvature in spacetime, as well as an opposite, negative curvature of the
same magnitude in the other sector (we call these conjugate curvatures):

Fig. 18 – Energy focused around the craft: space curvatures are increasing.

At some point, a criticality is reached. In this 2D analogy, we represent it in ﬁgure

20 as the connection of the two opposite folds together.

17

Fig. 19 – Criticality: the two folds get in contact along a circular line.

Then, a geometric surgery occurs:

Fig. 20 – Surgery: the two folds F and F* exchange their inner portions of space.

Such sudden geometric surgery is a catastrophe, in the mathematical sense. The
connection of the two surfaces is drastically modiﬁed: we go from a topological embed-
ding in ﬁgure 19 to an immersion in ﬁgure 20.

In reality, the opposite inner portions of the two folds do not even need to separate
and pass “one through the other”. This didactic representation involving an embedding
and an immersion of a 2D surface in a 3D space is only there to help people understand
the concept of geometric criticality. The two separate sheets have a meaning up to some
point, but no exact physical reality.

Actually, this is a discrete process since it occurs at the atomic level: neutrons in
metastable nuclei, which cannot bear any more energy, collapse into as many tiny space
bridges covering the whole surface of the craft: all phenomena located at the atomic
level propagate step by step, interacting with their neighborhood.

18

To continue on with the 2-fold analogy, ﬁgure 21 evokes the appearance of a criti-

cality at the level of nearby nuclei.

Fig. 21 – The same process, down to nuclei of neighboring atoms.

Let’s consider in ﬁgure 22 the 2D development of the merging of two nearby space
bridges when two nuclei close from one another reach such critical state. Such merging
occurs according to what geometers call a cuspidal point.

19

Fig. 22 – How two nearby space bridges form and merge together.

We can then illustrate the same process along a series of several nearby nuclei:

Fig. 23 – Same merging process for multiple nearby space bridges.

20

Which evolves into:

Fig. 24 – Final step: inner portions are connected to opposite folds.

All tiny space bridges have merged step by step according to a closed surface. Each
inner section is now connected to the opposite fold. Finally, the ship and the conjugate
portion of empty space are swapped.

Space comprising the ship is being die-cut. Back to ﬁgure 15, the spacecraft (white
disc) is now grafted into the negative sector (blue fold), while a portion of rareﬁed space
from the negative sector appears in lieu of the seemingly vanished ship. If the vehicle
has been transferred while it was still in the atmosphere, ambient air quickly ﬁlls the
empty volume of space left behind the disappeared craft in a snap.

Such connection has been represented in the previous sets of ﬁgures as a closed con-
tour line for reasons of simpliﬁcation, but this 1D line should have been rather a 2D
band, with a certain width. Similarly, in 3D such energy concentration would be applied
on a closed surface (in fact in a thin volume) covering the whole ship.

This is similar to a soap ﬁlm. One could, with computer simulations, model the
merging of two-dimensional images of neighboring nuclei in such state of geometric crit-
icality, driven by superﬁcial tension forces.

We made this 2D analogy to make the reader think about the key concept: how to
trigger a mass inversion of a large quantity of matter, by provoking a physical criticality
due to a large quantity of energy concentrated only in a limited volume, corresponding
to a thin layer surrounding the ship.

How to concentrate energy

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) allows to excite atom nuclei (instead of the more
common excitation of electron orbitals). This is done by embedding atoms in a strong
magnetic ﬁeld, then putting a strain on their nuclei with electromagnetic radiation of
appropriate frequency. Fields produced by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) currently
reach 3 to 7 teslas. But in such systems the energy levels are quite low, and the char-
acteristic relaxation time is of the order of 10−12 second only.

It turns out that many atoms have long lifetime metastable excitation levels. Such
excitation goes with a geometry modiﬁcation of nuclei which, from an initial spherical
shape, become prolate spheroids like gridiron footballs. Some usual metastable isomers
can have lifetimes of seconds, hours, days, etc.

21

Energy can be transferred directly and progressively to the nuclei of nuclear isomers,
which store it until they are force-fed and cannot bear any more energy. We consider
such a concentration of energy could cause a disruption in spacetime at the neutron
level in nuclei, made possible by the VSL mechanism triggered by high energy density
states originally detailed in [33] and [34] and later updated in [30] and [22]. This would
be an artiﬁcial version of the natural mass inversion process presented in [8] and [9].

Before triggering a mass inversion, according to the – still crude – idea to orient in
the same direction the spin of all atoms the ship is made of (and not only a small fraction
of them), it would be necessary to immerse these atoms in a perfectly uniform magnetic
ﬁeld, and a very strong one (we think: above 1000 teslas). The whole assembly must
bathe in this uniform magnetic ﬁeld (parallel ﬁeld lines) so that it cannot be created by a
traditional system of internal coils. The solution is then to ﬁnd a way to deposit a great
number of electric charges on the outer surface of the ship (or maybe according to a
certain thickness, within a special material in the shell), which becomes electrostatically
charged at a very high voltage (negative potential), and to put the object in rotation at
high rpm. Note that this implies that the object is made from a surface of revolution
with an axial symmetry.10 Among many simulations of such technique aimed to produce
a uniform magnetic ﬁeld inside a rotating object, we found an appropriate shape made
of two contiguous plates as shown in ﬁgure 25:

Fig. 25 – Parallel magnetic ﬁeld lines in an electrostatically charged

discoid object rotating around its z-axis (cross-section).

This peculiar shape has another advantage for atmospheric ﬂight, which is less exotic
than mass inversion for interstellar travel, but can still be considered as an advanced
propulsion system: during high speed intra-atmospheric ﬂight, such concave discoid
shape has been proven optimal for plasma conﬁnement to wall by magnetic gradient
inversion, when an external-ﬂow magnetohydrodynamic drive is used for propulsion and
active ﬂow control that is able to cancel shock waves and control temperature gradients,
overcoming the heat barrier at supersonic and hypersonic speeds. This secondary MHD
propulsion system is not presented here but its concepts are detailed in [36] and [37].
Theoretical demonstration of supersonic ﬂight without shock wave is exposed in [38]
and [39].

According to such combined propulsion systems, provided with the appropriate en-
ergy source, the same advanced vehicle would be able to take oﬀ vertically, ﬂy silently at

10With limited or no sharp edges, to prevent electron leaking due to electric arcs or corona discharges.

22

high speed in the atmosphere, reverse its mass to travel toward nearest stellar systems,
reappear in the vicinity of habitable planets, procced to a soft atmospheric entry, then
ﬁnally land on faraway worlds after a journey of a few days or months. Deep space and
interstellar missions would be conducted without having to resort to launching heavy
rockets in multiple-stage-to-orbit conﬁgurations to assemble big orbital motherships
containing small landing crafts. On the contrary, this is an all-in-one SSTO solution
and a drastically diﬀerent vision for the future of space exploration.

How to rotate such craft? An equatorial annular duct is ﬁlled with some gas, ionized
by an inductive coil wrapped around that chamber. The plasma is then accelerated in
this MHD ring accelerator by Lorentz forces (electrodeless travelling-wave accelerator).
As a reaction, the whole vehicle accelerates in the other direction, in a rotational motion.

Such high velocity rotation would be very harmful to the crew, centrifuged to death.
The solution is to decouple the inner passenger compartment from the rest of the ro-
tating spaceship. As a result, the craft would spin at high speed around an immobile
cockpit.

During the interstellar trip, the passenger compartment would again couple to the
rest of the craft in slow rotation, providing artiﬁcial gravity to the crew. The electro-
statically charged hull and the magnetic ﬁeld around would create a protective magne-
tosphere acting as a shield deviating incident charged particles present in inﬁnitesimal
quantities along the path followed by the ship in the extremely rareﬁed negative sector.

Figure 26 is a sectional image of such vehicle landed on the ground. The decoupling

toroidal cockpit and the annular rim accelerator are represented.

Fig. 26 – Discoid spaceship.

Right-angle turns

Such a craft would cruise at a relativistic speed during its interstellar journey. Using
more conventional thrusters, it could also follow trajectories at high speed in the posi-
tive sector, either in deep space or during an intra-atmospheric ﬂight, and still be able
to make 90◦ angle turns without harming the crew. The ﬁgure 27 illustrates the idea.

23

Fig. 27 – How a ﬂying vehicle cruising at high speed in our sector

could temporarily use the negative sector to make sharp turns.

Let such a spaceship cruise at a high velocity in our skies using MHD, as illustrated
in ﬁgure 27(A). In (B), the ship disappears as it undergoes a mass inversion into the
negative world, where it rotates by 45◦ using control moment gyroscopes, then reverses
the direction of its magnetic ﬁeld vector. In (C), the ship brieﬂy reappears in our sector
before immediately plunging back into the negative sector in (D), where it rotates again
by 45◦ with CMGs and restores its initial magnetic vector direction. In (E) when the
appropriate distance has been covered, the ship again undergoes a double hyperspace
transfer to aim its initial departure point then covers the remaining distance in the
negative frame. Finally, in (F) the ship reappears almost exactly at its initial point.

In fact, such a triangular trajectory is only a simple approximation. Turning the ship
by 45◦ would take some time. Meanwhile, as the ship appears at a relativistic speed in
the negative sector, it would have covered hundreds of millions of kilometers at an ap-
parent superluminal speed, before resurfacing at a remote location in space, somewhere
in the farthest reaches of the solar system, or maybe within the asteroid belt. This
would be too hazardous. Instead of six mass inversions and two 45◦ turns of ﬁgure 27,
the ship would undergo a great number of hyperspace transfers at a high frequency, each
time modifying its trajectory by a slight angle ∆θ. Then, a more realistic path is not
the triangular one shown above (made of very long segments in the negative sector), but
a polygonal trajectory made of a great number of broken lines, as illustrated in ﬁgure 28.

The ship would seem to make sharp turns at high velocity, a behavior that would
appear to “defy physics” according to an Earthly observer who would not necessarily
notice the series of sudden disappearances followed by the quick reappearances of the
craft at the same point in the sky, tracking instead an apparently “blinking object” that
would seem to cruise in straight line, then make a grinding halt followed by a right angle
turn.

BAC45°DEF✹45°24

Fig. 28 – More realistic trajectory along a high number of broken straight lines.

Such a series of hyperspace transfers at high frequency allows a craft to make any
sharp turn, or even reverse the direction of ﬂight, without the crew feeling any centrifugal
force.

Reintroduction of negative energy states in quantum mechanics

The continuation of this work obviously requires modeling the mass inversion process
at the atomic level using quantum mechanics. The ﬁrst step has been taken by Belgian
mathematician Nathalie Debergh who has recently joined the Janus team. She has
shown how negative energy states were ignored during the development of fundamental
models of quantum mechanics almost a century ago, and are still dismissed from quan-
tum ﬁeld theory. Steven Weinberg indeed wrote in [40], pp. 75–76 (emphasis added):

“At this point we have not yet decided whether P and T are linear and unitary or
antilinear and antiunitary.
The decision is an easy one. Setting ρ = 0 in Eq. (2.6.4) gives

P i H P−1 = i H,

where H ≡ P 0 is the energy operator. If P were antiunitary and antilinear then it
would anticommute with i, so PHP−1 = −H. But then for any state Ψ of energy
E > 0, there would have to be another state P−1Ψ of energy −E < 0. There are
no states of negative energy (energy less than that of the vacuum), so we are forced
to choose the other alternative: P is linear and unitary, and commutes rather than
anticommutes with H.
On the other hand, setting ρ = 0 in Eq. (2.6.6) yields

T i H T−1 = −i H.

If we supposed that T is linear and unitary then we could simply cancel the is, and
ﬁnd THT−1 = −H, with the again disastrous conclusion that for any state Ψ of
energy E, there is another state T−1Ψ of energy −E. To avoid this, we are forced
here to conclude that T is antilinear and antiunitary.”

25

This leads us to question the nature of the operator T, which reverts time.

In dynamical group theory [29], the operator T is real and T-symmetry produces

energy and mass inversion.

In quantum ﬁeld theory, operators are complex. They can then be unitary or anti-
unitary, and linear or antilinear. The arbitrary choice of an operator T antilinear and
antiunitary was made on the sole purpose to avoid negative energy particles, considered
as impossible.

A bit further in [40], page 104, Weinberg justiﬁes this decision:

“No examples are known of particles that furnish unconventional representations
of inversions, so these possibilities will not be pursued further here. From now on,
the inversions will be assumed to have the conventional action assumed in Section
2.6.”

Although British physicist Paul Dirac literally interpreted his discovery, in 1930, of
negative-energy quantum states from his own equations as the Dirac sea, an inﬁnitely
deep sea of particles with negative energy, the modern interpretation from quantum
ﬁeld theory is that negative energy states are forbidden, as the zero-point ﬁeld of the
quantum vacuum represents a ground state of lowest possible energy, so energy states
below the zero value could not exist. Indeed, the probability of existence of energy states
in quantum mechanics implies the ratio E/m. Therefore, if the energy is negative, that
probability would be negative.

But it is a biased explanation, as if the energy is negative, so is the mass (which would
also emit negative energy photons). . . hence the probability remains positive. Positive
energy and negative energy states would coexist in two separate worlds with increas-
ing energy potential from both sides of a common ground state of lowest possible energy.

Fortunately, Debergh has just shown in [41] that the foundations of quantum me-

chanics do in fact allow such negative energy states predicted by the Janus model.

A whole new world opens up.

Acknowledgement

The authors thank Julien Geﬀray for useful suggestions and English translation.

26

References

[1] J.-P. Petit, “FTL interstellar travel in the Janus cosmological model”, YouTube.

[2] R. Brent Tully, H. Courtois, Y. Hoﬀman and D. Pomar`ede, “The Laniakea supercluster

of galaxies”, Nature, 513 (7516): 71–73 (September 2014). arXiv:1409.0880.

[3] Y. Hoﬀman, D. Pomar`ede, R. Brent Tully and H. Courtois, “The dipole repeller”. Nature

Astronomy, 1: 0036 (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.02483arXiv:1702.02483.

[4] R. Adler, M. Bazin and M. Schiﬀer, “The Kerr Solution and Rotation”, in Introduction to
General Relativity, 2nd ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 258 (1975). ISBN 978-0070004207.
[5] K. Schwarzschild, “¨Uber das Gravitational eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen
Theorie”, Sitzungsberichte der K¨oniglich Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin, 189-196 (13 Jan. 1916)
tr.: S. Antoci and A. Loinger, “On the gravitational ﬁeld of a mass point according to
Einstein’s theory” (12 May 1999). arXiv:physics/9905030.

[6] K. Schwarzschild, “¨Uber das Gravitationsfeld einer Kugel aus incompressibler Fl¨ussigkeit
nach Einsteinsechen Theorie”, Sitzungsberichte der K¨oniglich Preußischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 424-434 (24 Feb. 1916)
tr.: S. Antoci, “On the gravitational ﬁeld of a sphere of incompressible ﬂuid according to
Einstein’s theory” (16 Dec. 1999). arXiv:physics/9912033.

[7] J.-P. Petit, “Mass inversion in a critical neutron star: An alternative to the black hole
model – Part 1”, 21st annual International Conference on Particle Physics and Cosmology
COSMO-17, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France (August 2017).

[8] J.-P. Petit, “Mass inversion in a critical neutron star: An alternative to the black hole
model – Part 2”, 21st annual International Conference on Particle Physics and Cosmology
COSMO-17, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France (August 2017).

[9] J.-P. Petit and G. d’Agostini, “Cancellation of the central singularity of the Schwarzschild
solution with natural mass inversion process”, Modern Physics Letters A, 30 (9): 1550051
(March 2015). doi:10.1142/S0217732315500510.

[10] H. Fearn, “Mach’s Principle, Action at a Distance and Cosmology”, Journal of Modern

Physics, 6 (3): 260-272 (February 2015). arXiv:1412.5426.

[11] J. F. Woodward, “Twists of fate: Can we make traversable wormholes in spacetime?”,
Foundations of Physics Letters, 10 (2): 153–181 (April 1997). doi:10.1007/BF02764237.

[12] A. G. Riess et al, “Observational Evidence from Supernovae for an Accelerating Universe
and a Cosmological Constant”, The Astronomical Journal, 116 (3): 1009–1038 (1998).
arXiv:astro-ph/9805201. doi:10.1086/300499.

[13] S. Perlmutter et al, “Measurements of Ω and Λ from 42 High-Redshift Super-
novae”, The Astrophysical Journal, 517 (2): 565–586 (1999). arXiv:astro-ph/9812133.
doi:10.1086/307221.

[14] “Adam Riess (Nobel Prize 2011) says the universe has a negative mass”, 2mn excerpt
of A. G. Riess’ Nobel Lecture, Aula Magna, Stockholm University (8 December 2011),
YouTube.

[15] H. Bondi, “Negative Mass in General Relativity”, Reviews of Modern Physics, 29 (3):

423–428 (July 1957). doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.29.423.

27

[16] W. B. Bonnor, “Negative mass in general relativity”, General Relativity and Gravitation,

21 (11): 1143–1157 (November 1989). doi:10.1007/BF00763458.

[17] J.-P. Petit, “The Twin Universe”, The Adventures of Archibald Higgins, Savoir-Sans-

[18] J.-P. Petit, “Faster Than Light”, The Adventures of Archibald Higgins, Savoir-Sans-

Fronti`eres (2008).

Fronti`eres (2008).

[19] J.-P. Petit, “The Janus Cosmological Model”, YouTube video series with English subtitles.

[20] JanusCosmologicalModel.com, web site dedicated to the Janus model.

[21] J.-P. Petit and G. d’Agostini, “Negative mass hypothesis in cosmology and the
nature of dark energy”, Astrophysics and Space Science, 354 (2):611-615 (2014).
doi:10.1007/s10509-014-2106-5.

[22] J.-P. Petit and G. d’Agostini, “Cosmological bimetric model with interacting positive
and negative masses and two diﬀerent speeds of light, in agreement with the observed
acceleration of the Universe”, Modern Physics Letters A, 29 (34): 1450182 (2014).
doi:10.1142/S021773231450182X.

[23] G. D’Agostini and J.-P. Petit, “Constraints on Janus Cosmological model from recent
observations of supernovae type Ia”, Astrophysics and Space Science, 363 (7): 139 (June
2018). doi:10.1007/s10509-018-3365-3

[24] J.-P. Petit and G. d’Agostini, “Lagrangian derivation of the two coupled ﬁeld equations
in the Janus cosmological model”, Astrophysics and Space Science, 357: 67 (May 2015).
doi:10.1007/s10509-015-2250-6.

[25] S. Hossenfelder, “A Bi-Metric Theory with Exchange Symmetry,” Physical Review D, 78:

044015 (August 2008). arXiv:0807.2838.

[26] A. D. Sakharov, “Violation of CP invariance, C asymmetry, and baryon asymmetry of

the universe”, JETP Letters, 5 (1): 24–26 (1967).

[27] A. D. Sakharov, “Collected Scientiﬁc Works”, Marcel Dekker (December 1982). ISBN

978-0824717148.

[28] A. A. Kirillov, “Merits and demerits of the orbit method”, Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 36 (4): 433–488 (August 1999). doi:10.1090/s0273-0979-99-00849-
6.

[29] J.-M. Souriau, “Description m´ecaniste des particules ´el´ementaires : Inversions d’espace et

de temps” in “Structure des Syst`emes Dynamiques”, Dunod (1970).
tr.: J.-M. Souriau, “A mechanistic description of elementary particles: Inversions of space
and time” in “Structure of Dynamical Systems”, Progress in Mathematics, Birkh¨auser,
pp. 189–193 (1997). ISBN 978-1-4612-6692-1. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-0281-3 14.

[30] J.-P. Petit, P. Midy and F. Landsheat, “Twin matter against dark matter”. 3rd Marseille
Cosmology Conference Where’s the Matter? Tracing Dark and Bright Matter with the
New Generation of Large-Scale Surveys. Marseille, France (June 2001).

[31] F. Henry-Couannier, G. D’Agostini and J.-P. Petit, “I- Matter, antimatter and geometry.
II- The twin universe model: a solution to the problem of negative energy particles. III-
The twin universe model plus electric charges and matter-antimatter symmetry”, preprint
(2005). arXiv:math-ph/0502042.

28

[32] J.-P. Petit and G. D’Agostini, “Five-dimensional bigravity. New topological description

of the Universe”, preprint (2008). arXiv:0805.1423.

[33] J.-P. Petit, “An interpretation of cosmological model with variable light velocity”. Modern
Physics Letters A, 3 (16): 1527–1532 (November 1988). doi:10.1142/S0217732388001823.
the interpretation
1733–1744 (December 1988).

[34] J.-P. Petit, “Cosmological model with variable light velocity:

of red shifts”. Modern Physics Letters A, 3 (18):
doi:10.1142/S0217732388002099.

[35] J.-P. Petit, “Janus Cosmological Model and the Fluctuations of the CMB”. Progress in

Physics, 14 (4): 226–229 (2018).

[36] J.-P. Petit and M. Viton, “Convertisseurs magn´etohydrodynamiques d’un genre nou-
veau : appareils `a induction” [Induction devices - A new type of magnetohydrody-
namic converter], Comptes Rendus de l’Acad´emie des Sciences, S´erie B (in French),
Paris: French Academy of Sciences, 281 (11):
157–160 (February 1977). Bib-
code:1977CRASB.284..167P.

[37] J.-P. Petit, J. Geﬀray and F. David, “MHD Hypersonic Flow Control for Aerospace Ap-
plications”, 16th AIAA/DLR/DGLR International Space Planes and Hypersonic Systems
and Technologies Conference (HyTASP), Bremen, Germany: American Institute of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics (October 2009). doi:10.2514/6.2009-7348.

[38] J.-P. Petit and B. Lebrun, “Shock wave annihilation by MHD action in supersonic ﬂow.
Quasi one dimensional steady analysis and thermal blockage”, European Journal of Me-
chanics B/Fluids, 8 (2): 163–178 (1989).

[39] J.-P. Petit and B. Lebrun, “Shock wave annihilation by MHD action in supersonic ﬂows.
Two-dimensional steady non-isentropic analysis. Anti-shock criterion, and shock tube sim-
ulations for isentropic ﬂows”, European Journal of Mechanics B/Fluids, 8 (4): 307–326
(1989).

[40] S. Weinberg, “Relativistic Quantum Mechanics”,

in The Quantum Theory of Fields,
Cambridge University Press, pp. 75–76 and p. 104 (1995). ISBN: 978-0521670531.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139644167.004.

[41] N. Debergh, J.-P. Petit and G. D’Agostini, “On evidence for negative energies and
masses in the Dirac equation through a unitary time-reversal operator”, preprint (2018).
arXiv:1809.05046.

