Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv
November 5, 2018

c(cid:13)ESO 2018

8
1
0
2

 
t
c
O
6
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

2
v
2
6
9
7
0

.

2
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter:

Negative masses and matter creation within a modiﬁed ΛCDM

framework
J. S. Farnes1, 2

ABSTRACT

1 Oxford e-Research Centre (OeRC), Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QG, UK.

e-mail: jamie.farnes@oerc.ox.ac.uk(cid:63)

2 Department of Astrophysics/IMAPP, Radboud University, PO Box 9010, NL-6500 GL Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Received February 23, 2018

Dark energy and dark matter constitute 95% of the observable Universe. Yet the physical nature of these two phenomena remains a
mystery. Einstein suggested a long-forgotten solution: gravitationally repulsive negative masses, which drive cosmic expansion and
cannot coalesce into light-emitting structures. However, contemporary cosmological results are derived upon the reasonable assumption
that the Universe only contains positive masses. By reconsidering this assumption, I have constructed a toy model which suggests that
both dark phenomena can be uniﬁed into a single negative mass ﬂuid. The model is a modiﬁed ΛCDM cosmology, and indicates that
continuously-created negative masses can resemble the cosmological constant and can ﬂatten the rotation curves of galaxies. The model
leads to a cyclic universe with a time-variable Hubble parameter, potentially providing compatibility with the current tension that is
emerging in cosmological measurements. In the ﬁrst three-dimensional N-body simulations of negative mass matter in the scientiﬁc
literature, this exotic material naturally forms haloes around galaxies that extend to several galactic radii. These haloes are not cuspy.
The proposed cosmological model is therefore able to predict the observed distribution of dark matter in galaxies from ﬁrst principles.
The model makes several testable predictions and seems to have the potential to be consistent with observational evidence from distant
supernovae, the cosmic microwave background, and galaxy clusters. These ﬁndings may imply that negative masses are a real and
physical aspect of our Universe, or alternatively may imply the existence of a superseding theory that in some limit can be modelled by
eﬀective negative masses. Both cases lead to the surprising conclusion that the compelling puzzle of the dark Universe may have been
due to a simple sign error.
Key words. Cosmology: theory – dark energy – dark matter – Galaxies: kinematics and dynamics – large-scale structure of Universe

1. Introduction

One of the most fascinating aspects of scientiﬁc history is that
regarding Einstein’s eﬀorts with the cosmological constant. It is
well known that Einstein added a cosmological constant to his
equations in order to provide a static Universe. Due to this bias,
he failed to predict the expansion of the Universe that was soon
observed by Hubble (Hubble 1929). Famously, upon learning of
the Universe’s expansion, Einstein set the cosmological constant
equal to zero and reportedly called its introduction his “biggest
blunder”.

Most contemporary physicists are familiar with the fact that
prior to Hubble’s discovery, Einstein associated the cosmological
constant term with a constant of integration. However, Einstein
did not always believe this to be the case, and important details
are currently absent from the historical narrative. In 1918, before
famously discarding the cosmological constant, Einstein made
the ﬁrst physical interpretation of the new Λ term that he had
discovered:

“a modiﬁcation of the theory is required such that ‘empty
space’ takes the role of gravitating negative masses which

(cid:63) The codes used for the N-body simulations can be downloaded at:

https://github.com/jamiefarnes/negative-mass-simulator

are distributed all over the interstellar space”. (Einstein
1918)

Despite this insight, within a year Einstein reformulated his
interpretation:

“the new formulation has this great advantage, that the
quantity Λ appears in the fundamental equations as a
constant of integration, and no longer as a universal
constant peculiar to the fundamental law”1 (Einstein
1919)

What led Einstein to believe that negative masses could provide
a solution to the cosmological constant is therefore of interest.
To understand the physics of negative masses further, we need to
‘polarise’ the Universe so that mass consists of both positive and
negative counterparts. Polarisation appears to be a fundamental
property of the Universe. Indeed, all well-understood physical
forces can be described through division into two opposing
polarised states. For example, electric charges (+ and -), magnetic
charges (N and S), and even quantum information (0 and
1) all appear to be fundamentally polarised phenomena. It
could therefore be perceived as odd that gravitational charges
– conventionally called masses – appear to only consist of positive
monopoles.

1 The chosen notation used by Einstein was not Λ, but rather λ.

Article number, page 1 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

While electromagnetism and quantum theory appear quite
comprehensively understood, there are numerous indications that
our understanding of the nature of mass remains incomplete on
all spatial scales. In the standard model of particle physics (e.g.
Aad et al. 2012), the mass of fundamental particles such as the
nine charged fermions (six quarks and three leptons) and the
Higgs boson are all free parameters that cannot be calculated
from ﬁrst principles. In cosmology, the observed matter in the
Universe only accounts for 5% of the observed gravity, while the
remaining 26% and 69% are accounted for via dark matter and
dark energy respectively (e.g. Planck Collaboration et al. 2016).
The physical nature of both these dark phenomena is completely
unknown, and the quest to identify the Universe’s missing mass
has even given rise to modiﬁcations to Newton’s and Einstein’s
theories of gravity (e.g. Ferreira & Starkman 2009). Nevertheless,
our understanding of general relativity has been robustly veriﬁed
by every experimental test (e.g. Abbott et al. 2016).

Given these substantial challenges to our understanding of
mass in the Universe, perhaps a new approach that separates mass
into positive and negative polarised counterparts can further our
understanding of cosmology. In this case, particles could have
the property of positive, zero, or negative mass. In Newtonian
physics, this can allow for a variety of diﬀerent types of negative
mass as the inertial and gravitational masses can diﬀer in sign.
However, throughout this paper I speciﬁcally only consider a
negative mass that is consistent with general relativity, so that
the weak equivalence principle always holds and negative mass
matter always has identical inertial and gravitational mass.

While positive mass is familiar to all of us, the concept of
negative mass is rather exotic.2 However, such negative masses
have a number of basic properties, as shown in Figure 1. While
a positive mass gravitationally attracts all surrounding masses, a
negative mass will gravitationally repel all surrounding masses.
If a force is exerted on a positive mass, the mass will move in the
direction of the applied force. However, if a force is exerted on
a negative mass, the mass will move towards the applied force.
Nevertheless, a negative mass at the surface of the Earth would
fall downwards in a similar manner to a positive mass.

One of the more bizarre properties of negative mass is that
which occurs in positive–negative mass particle pairs. If both
masses have equal magnitude, then the particles undergo a process
of runaway motion. The net mass of the particle pair is equal to
zero. Consequently, the pair can eventually accelerate to a speed
equal to the speed of light, c. Due to the vanishing mass, such
motion is strongly subject to Brownian motion from interactions
with other particles. In the alternative cases where both masses
have unequal magnitudes, then either the positive or the negative
mass may outpace the other – resulting in either a collision or the
end of the interaction.

Although counterintuitive and “preposterous” (Bonnor 1989),
all of these behaviours violate no known physical laws. Negative
masses are consistent with both conservation of momentum and
conservation of energy (Forward 1990), and have been shown
to be fully consistent with general relativity in the seminal
work of Bondi (1957). Crucially, negative masses are a natural
cold dark matter candidate, as negative mass material could not
gravitationally coalesce in order to form astrophysical structures
that can initiate fusion and emit light. As negative masses are
attracted towards positive masses, they seem capable of applying
pressure onto positive masses that could possibly modify a

2 A particle with negative mass is not to be confused with a particle of
negative mass-squared. Such tachyon particles have an imaginary mass,
and are not considered in this paper.

Article number, page 2 of 20

Fig. 1. Schematic cartoon of gravitational interactions between positive
(in yellow) and negative (in purple) mass particles. Black vectors indicate
the direction of the gravitational force, Fg = −GM1M2/r2, that is
experienced by a given particle. Red vectors indicate the direction of
the acceleration, a = Fg/M, that is experienced by a given particle
when the weak equivalence principle holds. There are three possible
cases: (i) Top row: the familiar positive–positive mass interaction, in
which both particles accelerate towards one another via gravitational
attraction, (ii) Middle row: the positive–negative mass interaction, in
which both particles accelerate in the same direction – pointing from the
negative mass towards the positive mass. This case is sometimes referred
to as runaway motion, and (iii) Bottom row: the negative–negative mass
interaction, in which both particles accelerate away from one another via
gravitational repulsion.

galaxy’s rotation curve. Furthermore, negative masses also make
a natural dark energy candidate, as a diﬀuse background of
mutually-repelling negative masses could drive the expansion
of the Universe. The repulsive negative masses would behave as
a dark ﬂuid. The equation of state for a perfect ﬂuid is given by
p = ωρc2, where p is the pressure, ρ is the energy density, and ω
is the equation of state parameter3.

Negative mass is not a new idea and conventional cosmology
would suggest that such material is ruled out. Much of the
standard reasoning for the exclusion of negative masses is based
upon ‘black swan’ arguments, in that a negative mass has never

3 Sometimes stated in units where c = 1.

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

been directly observed. In addition, as the Universe expands, the
density of exotic negative mass matter (with ω = 0) would be
increasingly diluted. The mutually-repulsive nature of negative
masses is therefore tantalisingly inconsistent with measurements
of dark energy, as this mysterious energy does not dilute but rather
retains a constant density (with ω = −1) as the Universe expands
(e.g. Planck Collaboration et al. 2014). This has previously ruled
out unusual negative mass matter as a dark energy candidate. The
introduction of bimetric models has allowed for extensions of
general relativity with two diﬀerent metrics (e.g. Hossenfelder
2008). One application of these models has been to explore
cosmological theories with negative masses as a form of dark
energy (Petit & d’Agostini 2014), however such theories have
remained incompatible with observations.

Despite this initial intellectual hurdle, the basic properties
of negative masses still make them a powerful and compelling
candidate for providing a uniﬁcation of dark matter and dark
energy within a single theoretical framework. It seems possible
that negative masses could constitute a form of dark ﬂuid that can
simultaneously explain both of the elusive dark phenomena. Such
a simple premise is an elegant one, particularly when considering
that the introduction of negative mass adds symmetry to the
Universe. Nevertheless, a theory of negative mass is complicated
to assess in relation to other known cosmological results –
which have overwhelmingly been developed with the implicit
assumption that mass is only positive. For these reasons, nearly all
theories, experiments, observations, and physical interpretations
need to be rigorously revisited. However, if negative mass is
a conceptual blindspot that is stopping us from developing a
more advanced theory of the Universe, then such elaborations can
clearly be fruitful. In this paper, I therefore attempt to test whether
Einstein’s insight could be correct, and what the consequent
implications would be for modern cosmology.

The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, I modify
general relativity to consider the theory of a negative mass
cosmology. In Section 3, I present three-dimensional N-body
simulations of positive and negative masses using 50,000 particles.
In Section 4, I consider any potential compatibility between
cosmological observations of distant supernovae, the cosmic
microwave background, and galaxy clusters with the negative
mass hypothesis. Section 5 provides a speculative discussion on
outstanding theoretical considerations that can be explored in the
future, and in Section 6 I provide a summary of the results.

and the Friedmann acceleration equation,

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

+

ρ +

3p
c2

Λc2
3 ,

= −4πG
3

¨a
(3)
a
where a is the scale factor, H ≡ ˙a/a is the Hubble parameter, ρ is
the total mass density of the universe, p is the pressure, k is the
curvature parameter or intrinsic curvature of space, and k/a2 is the
spatial curvature in any time-slice of the universe. k = +1, 0, and
−1, indicate a closed, ﬂat, and open universe respectively. For a
perfect ﬂuid, the pressure and mass density of the ﬂuid are related
via the equation of state, which is given by p = ωρ, where ω is
some constant and for negative mass matter ω = 0, this means
that for negative mass matter the pressure is negligible relative to
the mass density. However, I will show that ω in the equation of
state can be modiﬁed in cases of matter creation or annihilation.
For gravitationally repulsive matter (such as negative masses)
that is constantly being created, ω can equal −1 as described in
Section 2.3.1.

For a cosmology that contains negative masses, I can also
separate the content of the universe into its respective fractional
contributions from the density parameters of the various species
of energy contributors, such that,

ΩM+ + ΩM− + Ωr + ΩΛ = Ω,
(4)
where Ω = 1−Ωk and the density contributions Ωi include positive
masses M+, negative masses M−, radiation r, curvature k, and
the cosmological constant Λ. By deﬁnition, ΩM− is necessarily
negative or zero-valued. In the conventional ΛCDM cosmology
(e.g. Planck Collaboration et al. 2014, 2016), it is implicitly
assumed that ΩM− = 0 and explicitly assumed that ΩΛ > 0.
Moreover, ΩM+ (usually given the standard notation ΩM) is
typically separated into additional constituents, such as Ωb for
baryons and ΩCDM for cold dark matter. To date, no attempt
has been made to discern negative mass contributions from
observations of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) (e.g.
Planck Collaboration et al. 2016).

In the case of a matter-dominated universe (which has
Ωr = ΩΛ = 0) that includes negative masses, there are three
possibilities: (i) a positive-mass dominated cosmology with
|ΩM+| > |ΩM−|, (ii) a massless cosmology with |ΩM+| = |ΩM−|,
and (iii) a negative-mass dominated cosmology with |ΩM+| <
|ΩM−|. Eqs. (1) to (3) can therefore be solved for each of these
three cases.

2. Theoretical results
To understand the cosmological implications of negative masses,
I begin with Einstein’s ﬁeld equations,

Rµν − 1
2

Rgµν + Λgµν =

8πG
c4 Tµν,

where Rµν is the Ricci curvature tensor, R is the scalar curvature,
gµν is the metric tensor, Λ is the cosmological constant, G is
Newton’s gravitational constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum,
and Tµν is the stress-energy tensor.

Assuming a homogeneous and isotopic universe via the
Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker (FLRW) metric, and
assuming that the stress-energy tensor is that of a perfect ﬂuid,
Eqs. (1) can be used to derive the Friedmann equation,

(cid:18) ˙a

(cid:19)2

a

=

8πG
3 ρ +

Λc2
3

− kc2
a2 ,

2.1. Positive mass cosmology
The positive mass dominated cosmology with |ΩM+| > |ΩM−|
corresponds to the standard matter-dominated universe solutions
with a critical density given by ρc = 3H2/8πG and a total
density parameter given by Ω = ρ/ρc, where Ω = 1, < 1, and
> 1, correspond to critical density, open, and closed universes
respectively (e.g. Friedmann 1924).

(cid:18) ˙a

8πG
3

(ρ+ + ρ−) ,

The key diﬀerence to a conventional matter-dominated

cosmology is that the Friedmann equation is modiﬁed to,

(cid:19)2
(5)
a
where |ρ+| > |ρ−| and Ω = (ρ+ + ρ−)/ρc. In this new context the
meaning of the critical density is not clear. Typically, the critical
density is the speciﬁc value of positive mass density at which
the universe will not expand forever and will also not recollapse.
This meaning remains broadly unchanged for a negative mass

=

(1)

(2)

Article number, page 3 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

cosmology, with the sole caveat that ρc now becomes the net
density required to prevent both eternal expansion and recollapse.
This can be illustrated by observing that a critical density universe
corresponds to (ρ+ + ρ−) = ρc.

2.2. Massless cosmology
The massless cosmology with |ΩM+| = |ΩM−| is equivalent to an
empty universe. Observations clearly indicate that the Universe
is not empty. However, if the Universe contains equal quantities
of positive and negative masses then this is not an unphysical
solution – the Universe can have zero mass on large-scales. This
is equivalent to setting Tµν = 0 in Eqs. (1), ρ = 0 in Eqs. (2) to
(3), and Ω = 0. The consequences have been previously studied
both directly and indirectly.

Tryon (1973) demonstrated that suﬃcient negative mass
energy in the Universe would naturally allow for the creation
of a cosmos from nothing – with the Big Bang then being an
energy-conserving event. The Universe could then be a zero
mass, zero energy, system. In quantum ﬁeld theory, every event
that could happen in principle actually does happen occasionally
in a probabilistic manner. This allows for the spontaneous and
temporary emergence of particles from the vacuum in the form
of vacuum ﬂuctuations. In essence, particles can borrow energy
from the vacuum to come into existence for a brief period, as
long as that energy is repaid. This process can be described
through the uncertainty principle, ∆E∆t ∼ (cid:126)/2, which leads to the
natural consequence that our Universe could simply be a vacuum
ﬂuctuation that has zero energy and can therefore exist eternally.
This implies that our Universe is just one of those things that
happen on occasion, and we can simply think of its existence
as being illustrated by a 1 billion-σ statistical event. In Tryon
(1973), this negative energy was suggested to be the gravitational
potential energy from a positive mass due to its interaction with
the rest of the Universe, although a negative mass energy can
achieve the same function.

A massless cosmology with negative masses has also
been considered before (Benoit-Lévy & Chardin 2012). This
cosmology has symmetric quantities of matter and antimatter, in
which antimatter is hypothesised to have negative gravitational
mass, thereby leading to gravitational repulsion between matter
and antimatter. The cancellation of positive and negative masses
yields an eﬀectively empty space-time known as the Dirac–Milne
universe. In this cosmology, the scale factor evolves linearly with
time, thereby directly solving the age and horizon problems of a
matter-dominated universe so that inﬂation is no longer required.
While this is an elegant solution, such a cosmology would violate
the weak equivalence principle and therefore appears to be
inconsistent with general relativity (Bondi 1957). Furthermore,
if negative mass particles were antimatter, one would expect
positive–negative mass collisions to give rise to a diﬀuse gamma
ray background, which is not observed. Some of the earliest
descriptions of antimatter did consider those particles to have a
negative mass, and for collisions to result in a release of energy
(e.g. Schuster 1898). However, it has also been suggested that
the collision of negative and positive masses would result in
nulliﬁcation (Forward 1990).

These former works have demonstrated that the introduction
of negative mass to cosmology has the capacity to completely
cancel the energy budget of the Universe. Nevertheless, this
precise cancellation is not a necessity, and is rather a special case.
A matter-dominated universe could predominantly consist of
positive masses (as for the familiar case presented in Section 2.1),
or could be dominated by negative masses.

Article number, page 4 of 20

2.3. Negative mass cosmology
The negative mass dominated cosmology with |ΩM+| < |ΩM−|
corresponds to a universe that is less than empty. This is
equivalent to setting Tµν < 0 or ρ < 0. In a non-expanding
space, a negative mass ﬂuid would undergo an expansion that is
characterised by a uniform stretching as detailed in Appendix A.
However, in this Section we are concerned with the cosmological
evolution of an expanding space.

For a matter-dominated cosmology with Λ = 0, purely via
inspection of Eq. (2), it is clear that if ρ is negative, there can only
be physical solutions when k = −1. The negative mass cosmology
therefore has negatively curved spatial sections. We can rewrite
(cid:19)2
the Friedmann equation as

= H2 =

8πG
3 ρ− +

c2
a2 .

(cid:18) ˙a

a

(6)

(7)

For a matter-dominated cosmology with a cosmological
constant, if ρ is negative and Λ > 0, it can be possible that
k = −1, 0, +1. In the alternative case, where ρ is negative and
Λ < 0, there can again only be physical solutions when k = −1.
In both cases
ΩM+ + (ΩM− + ΩΛ) = 1 − Ωk,
and so it can be seen that a degeneracy exists between ΩM− and
ΩΛ such that Ωdegen = ΩM− + ΩΛ. In this case, a degeneracy
is meant in the sense that one can change both parameters and
leave their sum unchanged. In a conventional ΛCDM cosmology,
where ΩM− is taken to be zero, one is actually measuring Ωdegen
and could therefore falsely infer a cosmological constant instead
of a negative density parameter.

It is typically assumed that ΩM− and ΩΛ can be discriminated
based upon the equation of state for a perfect ﬂuid. For non-
relativistic matter, ω = 0, whereas for a true cosmological
constant, ω = −1. In other words, negative mass matter is
conventionally assumed to dilute in density as the Universe
expands, whereas the cosmological constant remains constant.
From observations, the equation of state parameter for the Ωdegen
component is close to −1 (e.g. Planck Collaboration et al. 2014).
This is typically interpreted as evidence for mysterious dark
energy, the physical properties of which remain unknown.

2.3.1. Matter creation
I have demonstrated that the degeneracy between negative mass
matter and a cosmological constant can typically be broken
using the equation of state parameter, ω. However, I now
consider the consequences if matter is continuously created in
the Universe. Such matter creation is not a new concept and
was previously invoked to describe the disproven steady-state
theory of the Universe (Bondi & Gold 1948; Hoyle 1960). In
this theory, new matter is continuously-created in order to keep
the average density constant as particles move apart due to the
expansion of the Universe. This steady-state theory is inconsistent
with observations, as it cannot explain the cosmic microwave
background or radio source counts. However, the creation term
has only ever been applied to positive mass matter, and so may
still be useful for understanding dark energy and matter in an
expanding Universe.

Matter creation has been explored more recently in terms
of particle production at the expense of a gravitational ﬁeld
(Prigogine et al. 1988). I now calculate the implications for
negative masses. One plausible approach is to model
the

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

cosmological solutions for ‘adiabatic’ particle production in
the presence of spatial curvature or an equivalent ‘ﬂuid’. For
creation of matter, we can modify Einstein’s equations to include
a creation term or a C-ﬁeld to the eﬀective energy-momentum
tensor,
T(cid:48)
µν
where Tµν is the energy-momentum tensor for a ﬂuid with
equation of state p = (γ − 1)ρ such that
Tµν = (ρ + p)uµuν + pgµν,

= Tµν + Cµν,

(9)

(8)

and Cµν is the energy-momentum tensor which corresponds to
the matter creation term, such that

Cµν = PC(gµν + uµuν).

Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are therefore modiﬁed to
Rµν − 1
2

Rgµν + Λgµν =

Tµν + Cµν

8πG
c4

,

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(10)

(11)

and the two ﬂuids interact to provide an eﬀective equation of state
p = ωeﬀρ (e.g. Pan et al. 2016). The resulting ﬁeld equations do
not just describe space and matter, but now also include creation.
The creation tensor cancels the matter density and pressure,
leaving just the overall eﬀective form of the vacuum tensor. The
sources of the creation tensor are places where matter is created
(or destroyed). The Cµν term has previously been used to suggest
an alternative theory of gravity (Hoyle & Narlikar 1964), however
such a ﬁeld was suggested to be incompatible with an expanding
universe unless matter with negative inertial and gravitational
mass were to exist (Hawking 1965).

For a FLRW metric in which matter creation is taking place,
Eq. (3) is modiﬁed to include an additional term due to creation
pressure, which is related to gravitationally induced adiabatic
particle production by

PC =

(p + ρ),

−Γ
3H

(12)

where PC is the matter creation pressure, Γ(t) is the creation rate
or more speciﬁcally the rate of change of the particle number
in a physical volume V containing N particles (Pan et al. 2016;
Paliathanasis, Barrow, & Pan 2017). By assuming that the ﬂuid
component of Eqs. 2 and 3 behaves as a perfect ﬂuid with an
equation of state given by p = (γ−1)ρ, then Paliathanasis, Barrow,
& Pan (2017) show that the relation between ωeﬀ and the particle
creation rate Γ is given by
1 − Γ
3H

= −1 + γ

ωeﬀ =

(13)

P
ρ

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

,

where P = p + PC, and γ is a constant. This has an important
consequence as it shows that during matter creation, the equation
of state parameter is related to the particle creation rate. Hence,
diﬀerent eﬀective ﬂuids and diﬀerent gravitational eﬀects can
be provided by varying Γ. In other words, the creation of matter
modiﬁes the equation of state parameter. For a constant creation
rate of Γ = 3H, one obtains ω = −1. The introduction of matter
creation can therefore yield an equation of state equivalent to a
cosmological constant.

It is worth noting that the equation of state parameter of this
space-time ﬂuid, ωeﬀ, can actually take on many values depending
on the precise rate of matter creation, and it is only constrained
to exactly equal −1 when Γ = 3H. Only when the creation of

negative masses sustains itself at a very speciﬁc rate does it serve
to provide a constant density as a function of time and thus a
cosmological constant with ωeﬀ = −1. If the creation of negative
masses is occurring too slowly to replenish the density, which is
steadily decreasing through mutual repulsion and the expansion
of the universe, then ωeﬀ > −1. If the density of negative masses is
increasing as a function of time, then we obtain a phantom energy
model with ωeﬀ < −1. Further study of the creation term Cµν
will be able to determine what drives the creation rate. However,
within this model the creation rate Γ can vary as both a function
of space and time. When varying as a function of time, Γ(t)
potentially gives rise to a time-varying Hubble parameter and a
time-varying cosmological constant. When varying as a function
of space, this gives rise to an inhomogeneous distribution of
ωeﬀ throughout the universe. For example, one could imagine
spatial pockets of negative mass with particularly high or low
creation rates. This would give rise to an inhomogeneous and
anisotropic distribution of expansion speeds across the sky that
varies around individual voids in the galaxy distribution, and
which could therefore be tested using observational data. This
can be done by looking at the measured galaxy distribution using
upcoming radio telescopes such as the Square Kilometre Array
(SKA) and its pathﬁnders and precursors in combination with
future optical and infrared surveys such as Euclid and LSST (e.g.
Maartens et al. 2015). Future studies will be able to determine
whether there is matter creation taking place and to investigate in
more detail any inﬂuence that Γ could have on the ultimate fate
of the Universe.

The continuous-creation of negative masses implies that the
universe would be taking on an increasingly negative energy state.
I note that this negative energy is not created all at once in a
cataclysmic event, but is steadily created at the rate given by Γ.
This could be interpreted as the vacuum instability being a real,
physical, phenomena. In other words, rather than positive mass
matter collapsing into an inﬁnitely negative energy state, this
cosmology results in the continuous creation of (potentially real
or virtual) particles with negative energy. Such speculations can
be considered more rigorously in future works.

2.3.2. Equivalence with the cosmological constant
Let us now consider the case of negative masses that are being
constantly created. These negative masses gravitationally repel
each other – thereby pushing apart structures in the universe. I
showed in Section 2.3.1 that a constant creation rate of Γ = 3H
provides ω = −1. Negative masses that are being constantly
created therefore do not undergo the typical dilution as the
universe expands, as would be the case for normal matter which
conventionally has ω = 0. In fact, these continuously-created
negative masses appear to resemble dark energy.

There is therefore a strong degeneracy between ΩM− and
ΩΛ, as discussed in Section 2.3. This degeneracy is present in
the supernovae observations of an accelerating Universe (see
Section 4).

I am arguing that these negative masses are created at such a
rate that they retain – on large scales – a constant density. I can
therefore modify Friedmann’s equation to

=

8πG
3

(ρ+ + ρ−) − kc2
a2 .

a
As ρ− is constant, I can deﬁne Λ = 8πGρ−/c2, thereby obtaining

(14)

(15)

=

8πG
3 ρ+ +

Λc2
3

− kc2
a2 .

(cid:19)2
(cid:19)2

(cid:18) ˙a
(cid:18) ˙a

a

Article number, page 5 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

This is the standard Friedmann equation given in Eq. (2). In
conclusion, I have shown that constantly-created negative masses
are a natural explanation for the cosmological constant. The
physical properties of negative masses that were undergoing
constant creation would be rather similar to the accepted and
inferred properties of the cosmological constant. Within this toy
model, Λ can now be interpreted as the neglected negative mass
content of the Universe, rather than as some mysterious extra term.
As these negative masses can take the form of a cosmological
constant, one can deduce that they are a property of the vacuum
rather than non-relativistic matter in the conventional sense. In
summary, the ﬁeld equations are modiﬁed to
Rµν − 1
2
where the conventional Λgµν term is now represented by a
combination of T−
µν (an exotic matter term) and Cµν (a modiﬁed
gravity term).

8πG
c4

Rgµν =

+ T−

+ Cµν

(16)

T +
µν

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

µν

,

(cid:18) ˙a

(cid:19)2

=

Λc2
3

− kc2
a2 ,

2.3.3. Solutions to the Friedmann equation
I showed in Section 2.3.2 that Λ can be modelled as a constant
density of negative masses, which remain constant via matter
creation. If I consider the positive mass matter as negligible, we
have the Friedmann equation

a
where Λ = 8πGρ−/c2. As by deﬁnition ρ− < 0, it must also be
the case that Λ < 0. It is clear that for Λ < 0, Eq. (17) can only be
satisﬁed when k = −1. The solution for the scale-factor is given
by



(cid:114) −3
(cid:114)−Λc2

Λc2 sin

cot

3

t

3

(cid:114)−Λc2
 ,
(cid:114)−Λc2


3

 ,

t

a(t) =

H(t) =

together with a Hubble parameter given by

(17)

(18)

(19)

(cid:112)−3π2/Λc2.

which corresponds to an Anti-de Sitter space (AdS) with a time-
variable Hubble parameter. This AdS universe undergoes a cycle
of expansion and contraction with a timescale of
This is as a negative value of Λ, if interpreted as vacuum energy,
corresponds to a negative energy density (Hawking & Page 1982).
This is a counterintuitive result, as although the negative masses
are gravitationally repelling one another, the cosmological eﬀect
appears to be for the negative energy associated with negative
masses to cause the universe to recollapse. The solution describes
an open universe which expands from a Big Bang, reaches a
maxima, and then recontracts to a Big Crunch. This appears to
be an elegant outcome – by introducing negative masses that
undergo continuous creation, one obtains a cyclic cosmology.
Even with the addition of positive mass matter, a universe with
a negative cosmological constant would eventually recollapse
due to this extra attractive force. Interestingly, the value of Λ is
necessarily ﬁnely-tuned – if the magnitude of Λ is too large, then
the universe will not exist for suﬃcient time to create observers.
For a cosmological constant of similar magnitude to that which
is currently interpreted from cosmological observations, |Λ| ≈
0.3 × 10−52 m−2, the lifetime of each cycle of the universe would
be ∼ 105 Gyr. In an epoch ∼ 14 Gyr after a Big Bang, the universe
Article number, page 6 of 20

would therefore be observed to be in an expanding phase. The
continuous negative mass matter creation would cause objects in
this universe to be gravitationally accelerated apart, but only on a
local level. In late-times, this cyclic cosmology with AdS space
collapses due to its negative energy.

One could also attempt to calculate the age of the universe in
this cosmology, which can be conveniently estimated from Eq. 19
as

(cid:114) −3

(cid:114)−Λc2



 .

1
H0

3

(20)

Λc2 arctan

t0 =
For H0 = 67 km s−1 Mpc−1 = 2.17 × 10−18 s−1 and |Λ| ≈ 0.3 ×
10−52 m−2, then the age of the universe would be ∼ 13.8 Gyr.
While this appears to be compatible with observations of our
own Universe, there are several notable caveats that could either
extend or shorten the calculated age. In the presented toy model,
Λ can itself be a function of time, which could drastically alter the
results. The fundamental change of including negative masses into
the Universe would also require reinterpretation of the standard
observational results – which may in turn adjust the values of
both H0 and Λ.

One notable point of interest is that the derived AdS space
corresponds to one of the most researched areas of string theory,
the Anti-de Sitter/Conformal Field Theory correspondence
(Maldacena 1999). String theories naturally require the
compactiﬁcation of six dimensional Calabi-Yau spaces onto
AdS backgrounds, meaning onto space-times with negative Λ
(e.g. Prokopec 2011), and it has therefore remained puzzling
why cosmological observations have not provided evidence for
Λ < 0. In the proposed toy model, Λ < 0 also seems to be able to
explain the ﬂat rotation curves observed in galaxies, as detailed
in Section 2.3.4. The existence of AdS space implies that string
theory may possibly be directly applicable to our Universe. I
note that this cyclic universe does not violate the positive energy
theorem of Witten (1981), which approximately states that it is
not possible to construct an object out of ordinary matter (with
positive local energy density), that has a total energy which is
negative. The positive energy theorem has also been extended to
AdS space-time (Abbott & Deser 1982; Gibbons et al. 1983).

Another interesting result is that the theory directly predicts a
time-variable Hubble parameter, which may be consistent with
recent cosmological measurements (Efstathiou 2014; Riess et
al. 2016; Bonvin et al. 2017). Nevertheless, in this scenario,
estimates of H from the CMB would likely be strongly aﬀected
through modelling the CMB data with a ﬂat ΛCDM model
universe. I note that I have here only considered the eﬀects upon
a cosmology dominated by Λ and k. Although beyond the scope
of this current paper, consideration of a more physical universe –
that also includes ρ+ – may considerably adjust the cosmological
behaviour at early times and the precise form of a time-variable
Hubble parameter. Such scenarios can be explored further in
future works.

2.3.4. Flattening of galaxy rotation curves
I now consider the localised properties of positive masses that
are immersed in a negative mass ﬂuid. Such a scenario will
clearly have an eﬀect on the dynamics of positive masses and
the subsequent evolution of a positive mass system. This thereby
allows us to consider the implications for the dynamics of galaxies
and similar structures.

The standard galaxy rotation scenario can be described as the
case where a positive mass test particle, of mass M+, is located at

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

constant. We can deﬁne

ρvac =

Λc2
4πG ,

(23)

mr.

(26)

(27)

(28)

so that the Poisson equation for gravity is given by
∇2φ = 4πGρ+ − 4πGρvac = 4πGρ+ − Λc2,
where φ is the scalar potential and ρ+ is the positive mass density.
If we set φ = 0 at the origin and assume spherical symmetry, then
Eq. (24) has the solution
φ(r) = −GM(cid:63)
r

− Λc2
6

(24)

(25)

r2,

which gives the potential at distance r from a central point mass
M(cid:63). In the case where Λ = 0, we retrieve the standard potential
for Newton’s law of gravitation. The force exerted on a particle
of mass m is related to the scalar potential by F = −m∇φ, which
yields

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

F = −m ∂

∂r φ = −m ∂

∂r

−GM(cid:63)
r

− Λc2
6

r2

= −GM(cid:63)m

+

r2

Λc2
3

=

(cid:114)

(cid:114)

We can therefore modify Eq. (21) to provide

mv2
r

GM(cid:63)m

r2

− Λc2
3

mr,

which by rearrangement, leads to the solution for the rotation
curve

v =

GM(cid:63)

r

− Λc2
3

r2.

√

Again, we can see that for Λ = 0, we obtain the standard
Keplerian rotation curve. However, for non-zero values of the
cosmological constant, the rotation curve is modiﬁed. The
modiﬁcation of the rotation curve for increasing magnitudes of
positive and negative Λ in a galaxy with mass and size similar to
the Milky Way is shown in Figure 2. For a negative cosmological
constant, the rotation curve clearly increases linearly towards the
outskirts of a galaxy, such that v ∝ (|Λ|1/2c/
3)r. This appears
consistent with observational results, and previous studies have
found that most rotation curves are rising slowly even at the
farthest measured point (Rubin, Ford, & Thonnard 1980). The
data again appear to be consistent with a negative cosmological
constant. I emphasise that the rotation curves are being aﬀected by
the local negative mass density, which can coalesce into halo-like
structures (see Section 3.1). The inferred value of Λ in the vicinity
of galaxies is therefore expected to be of larger magnitude than
the cosmological constant inferred from cosmological expansion.
In other words, although a speciﬁc large-scale constant rate of
particle creation is required to enable a ωeﬀ = −1 universe, the
resulting particle density in intergalactic space would likely be
less than the amount of negative masses that would be required
to balance a galaxy rotation curve. Hence, more generally the
solution for the rotation curve is given by

v =

GM(cid:63)

− 8πGρ−

r2,

r

3

(29)

where ρ− is the local negative mass density.

I note that the presented solutions, which require a steeply-
rising linear rotation curve, are only applicable for a strongly

Article number, page 7 of 20

Fig. 2. Predicted circular velocity as a function of radius, for a galaxy
of similar size and mass to the Milky Way and that is inﬂuenced by a
cosmological constant. The displayed rotation curves are for increasing
magnitudes of a positive (in blue) and a negative (in red) cosmological
constant. The Keplerian curve with Λ = 0 is also shown (in black).
Whereas a positive cosmological constant steepens the decline of a
rotation curve, a negative cosmological constant ﬂattens the rotation
curve, causing a steady increase at larger galactic radii. Solid body
rotation in the centre of the galaxy is not shown.

a distance r from the galactic centre. The galaxy has the majority
of its mass, M(cid:63), concentrated at the centre. I consider this system
from an observing frame where the positive mass particle is
seen to be rotating with an orbital velocity, v, about an axis of
rotation through the centre of the galaxy. For a stable circular
orbit, the gravitational force (which acts inwardly towards the
orbital centre) is equal to the centripetal force (which is related to
the component of the velocity acting tangentially to the orbital
path). This provides the simple equation

By rearranging Eq. (21), I obtain

GM+M(cid:63)

=

M+v2

.

r

r2

(cid:114)

v =

GM(cid:63)

,

r

(21)

(22)

which is the standard Keplerian rotation curve whereby the
orbital velocity of a test particle should decrease as a function
of increased radius. Nevertheless, very few galaxies show any
evidence for such a Keplerian rotation curve. Hα and radio
HI observations of galaxies both indicate that rotation curves
remain essentially ﬂat out to several tens of kpc, providing strong
evidence for the existence of dark matter (Rubin & Ford 1970;
Rubin, Ford, & Thonnard 1980; Rubin et al. 1985).

I now construct an alternative model for the galaxy rotation
scenario, that also includes a cosmological constant. In this case,
the same setup exists as in the standard galaxy rotation scenario.
However, I also now assume that the positive mass galaxy is
surrounded by a halo of continuously-created negative masses,
with constant density ρ− and of total mass M−. The positive
mass test particle is now immersed in a negative mass ﬂuid
that, as shown in Section 2.3.2, behaves with resemblance to
a cosmological constant with Λ = 8πGρ−/c2.
In the limit of small velocity, v (cid:28) c, and in the weak
ﬁeld approximation, Einstein’s ﬁeld equations should reproduce
Newtonian gravity. We can therefore examine the Newtonian
limit of the ﬁeld equations in the case of a non-zero cosmological

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

negative Λ. Figure 2 demonstrates that for a slightly negative Λ,
the increase in velocity is just able to overcome the Keplerian
decline, such that the rotation curve remains essentially ﬂat as a
function of distance.

Although the majority of observed rotation curves are largely
ﬂat, there is some observational evidence that rotation curves
can continue to rise out to large galactocentric radii (e.g. Rubin,
Ford, & Thonnard 1980). However, there are also reasons why
the theoretical rotation curves may generally appear to rise more
rapidly than is often seen in observations. The presented toy
model is just a simple case, which demonstrates the change to
a rotation curve enacted by a negative mass halo. There are
several simplifying assumptions that have been made: (i) the
positive mass within a galaxy is not concentrated at a central
point and has a radially-dependent mass proﬁle, (ii) a typical
galaxy has separate bulge, halo, and disk components which are
not modelled here, and (iii) the local negative mass density may
be asymmetric and itself has a radial mass distribution. In order
to ﬁt observational rotation curve data, these additional factors
would all need to be modelled in further detail. This would then
be able to either validate or rule out the proposed cosmology (and
the existence of a negative cosmological constant). However, we
consider this ﬁtting process to be beyond the scope of this current
paper.

Interestingly, a solution that invoked a negative cosmological
constant as an explanation for ﬂat galaxy rotation curves has
been considered before by Whitehouse & Kraniotis (1999);
Kraniotis & Whitehouse (2001), but was dismissed by Bergstrom
& Danielsson (2000) on the basis that it appeared incompatible
with observations of supernovae. In Section 4, a proposal is
made to provide reconciliation between a negative cosmological
constant and the supernovae results.

3. N-body simulations

One of the most eﬀective manners of testing a physical hypothesis
related to particle interactions is via N-body simulations. Most
modern N-body software packages do not support exotic and
rarely-studied phenomena such as negative masses. I have
therefore written new software to perform three-dimensional
(3D) gravitational N-body simulations using python, numpy,
and matplotlib. The code is parallelised using dask in order
to make use of the multiple processing cores available in most
modern machines. The N-body code used here evaluates the
particle positions and velocities at each timestep by using direct
methods, thereby avoiding the introduction of any approximations
and maintaining the highest accuracy – albeit at the cost of
substantial computing time, of the order of O(N2) per timestep.
The primary motivation for this computational perspective is
not focussed on performance, but rather on providing easily-
understandable, open-source software. This enables the presented
results to be easily replicated and veriﬁed on any scientist’s
own machine, rather than requiring any specialised hardware
or software setup. The simulations presented here are therefore
necessarily primitive in comparison with the state-of-the-art (e.g.
Springel et al. 2005), but provide examples that demonstrate
what can be expected from such a toy model. Unless stated
otherwise, all of the simulations use a total of 50,000 particles. I
use standard N-body units, with G = 1.0 and a total positive mass
M+ = 1.0. A softening parameter of (cid:15) = 0.07 was also used. Due

Article number, page 8 of 20

to computational reasons, no matter creation was included in the
current simulations.4

The simulations are presented in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3. In
Section 3.1, I demonstrate that in the presence of negative mass
material a positive mass galaxy naturally forms a dark matter
halo with a radius that is several times larger than the positive
mass component. Furthermore, due to the mutually-repulsive
nature of negative masses, the formed halo is not cuspy. This
provides a resolution of the cuspy-halo problem (e.g. de Blok
2010), and to my knowledge makes negative masses the only dark
matter candidate that can provide a non-contrived solution. In
Section 3.2, I show that – in the simulations – the gravitational
force exerted by this negative mass halo pushing inwards on
the positive mass galaxy leads to a ﬂat galaxy rotation curve. In
Section 3.3, I demonstrate that a mix of positive and negative
mass material can result in structure formation. An initially
uniform distribution of both positive and negative masses leads
to the conventional ﬁlamentary and void-like structures observed
in standard large-scale structure simulations. Moreover, the
positive mass component of these simulations naturally becomes
surrounded by negative mass material – leading to ubiquitous
dark matter haloes for every astrophysical object. In Section 3.4,
I describe the constraints on runaway motion that are provided
by the simulations.

3.1. Formation of a dark matter halo

In the ﬁrst set of simulations, a positive mass galaxy is located
at the centre of the initial particle distribution. This positive
mass galaxy is initialised with spherical-symmetry and following
the conventional Hernquist model, with a scale radius equal to
1.0 (Hernquist 1990). The Hernquist model is used to set the
initial particle positions and velocities of the positive masses. The
velocities consist of a radial component and are also built hot, with
a velocity dispersion provided by a small Gaussian component
with a standard deviation of 0.3. The galaxy comprises 5,000
particles, with a total positive mass of M+ = 1.0. The initial
positive mass particle distribution is located at the centre of a
cube of negative masses with volume 2003. The initial conditions
of these negative masses are set to be uniformly distributed in
position and with zero initial velocity. The negative mass sea
comprises 45,000 particles, with a total mass of M− = −3.0.
The simulation is scaled such that the positive mass galaxy has
similar properties to the Milky Way, with a characteristic radius of
15 kpc and a mass of 5.8 × 1011M(cid:12). The simulation consequently
runs over 21.5 Gyr with a timestep of 35.9 Myr. Each side of
the box of negative masses has a length of 3 Mpc. Assuming
spherical particles, each of the 45,000 negative masses therefore
has an initial descriptive radius equivalent to 52 kpc between each
particle.

The resulting particle distribution from this simulation is
shown in Figure 3. The full animated video from this simulation is
available online. The negative masses at the outskirts of the cube
are mutually-repelled by other surrounding negative masses and
the cube begins to expand in volume, as discussed in Section 2.3.
Meanwhile, the negative masses within the central portion of the
cube are attracted towards the positive mass galaxy. From their
initially zero velocities, the negative mass particles are slushed to-
and-fro from either side of the positive mass galaxy. Eventually,
the negative mass particles reach dynamic equilibrium in a halo

4 While no matter creation is included in the simulations, this would
only serve to add additional negative masses, which in most cases would
only further strengthen the results.

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

Fig. 3. N-body simulations showing the formation of a non-cuspy dark matter halo from an initially motionless particle distribution of 45,000
negative masses (in purple), that surround a Hernquist-model galaxy of 5,000 positive masses (in yellow). Both the initial (top) and the ﬁnal (bottom)
time-steps are shown. An animated video from this simulation is available online.

Article number, page 9 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

Fig. 4. Plot of the magnitude of the density proﬁle as a function of radius
from the galactic centre, as extracted from the N-body simulations. The
density proﬁles shown are: (i) as empirically determined for a negative
mass cosmology from the N-body simulations (in blue), (ii) for a NFW
proﬁle (in dark red), and (iii) for an observationally motivated Burkert
proﬁle (in light red). The negative mass density proﬁle is calculated in
equally-spaced radial bins, with the measurements indicated by data
points and overplotted with a moving average to guide the eye. The
simulated dark matter halo is non-cuspy and best described by the
Burkert proﬁle. Beyond the radius of the negative mass halo, the radial
proﬁle of the diﬀuse negative mass background becomes visible. The
sharp cut-oﬀ to the density proﬁle at the edge of the halo may be further
modiﬁed by matter creation. Negative masses can therefore simply
reproduce the key features of observed dark matter density proﬁles
in real galaxies.

that surrounds the positive mass galaxy and which extends out to
several galactic radii. The negative mass particles have naturally
formed a dark matter halo.

Observations of galaxies typically indicate an approximately
constant dark matter density in the inner parts of galaxies,
while conventional cosmological simulations of positive mass
dark matter indicate a steep power-law-like behaviour. This is
known as the core–cusp problem or the cuspy halo problem
and is currently unsolved (de Blok 2010). The negative mass
halo that has formed in the simulations presented here can be
clearly seen in the simulations to have a ﬂat central dark matter
distribution. The typically assumed positive mass particles that
are used in conventional simulations are gravitationally attractive
and thereby accumulate into a sharp cusp. However, negative
mass particles are self-interacting and gravitationally repulsive –
thereby yielding a ﬂat inner density proﬁle. To demonstrate this,
the extracted density proﬁle from the simulations is shown in
Figure 4. It is worth noting that the precise form of the density
proﬁle will be further modiﬁed by matter creation. Nevertheless,
the magnitude of the simulated negative mass density proﬁle is
shown and compared to both the cuspy Navarro–Frenk–White
(NFW) proﬁle derived from standard N-body simulations with
positive mass dark matter (e.g. Navarro, Frenk, & White 1997),
and to the non-cuspy, observationally motivated, Burkert density
proﬁle (Burkert 1995). The Burkert proﬁle is clearly a much
better representation of the simulated dark matter halo than the
NFW proﬁle. A negative mass cosmology can therefore provide
a solution to the cuspy halo problem. This appears to be the
only cosmological theory within the scientiﬁc literature that can
explain and predict the distribution of dark matter in galaxies
from ﬁrst principles.

As the halo consists of negative mass particles, this will
screen the positive mass galaxy from long-range gravitational

Article number, page 10 of 20

Fig. 5. Plot of the circular velocity, vcirc, as a function of radius, r, as
extracted from the N-body simulations. The rotation curves shown are:
(i) for a positive mass galaxy consisting of 5,000 particles (in black), and
(ii) for an identical positive mass galaxy with identical initial conditions,
albeit now surrounded by an initially uniform distribution of 45,000
negative mass particles (in red). The rotation curves are plotted using a
moving average for each set of 50 particles – the means and standard
errors in vcirc for these particles are indicated by the solid lines and the
shaded areas respectively. The rotation of the galaxy that consists of only
positive mass clearly drops oﬀ following a Keplerian curve. Nevertheless,
the galaxy with a negative mass halo has an essentially ﬂat rotation curve
that is slowly rising out to large galactic radii.

interactions. This is similar to the screening eﬀects that are seen
in electrical plasmas with positive and negative charges, except
this is a gravitational plasma with positive and negative masses.
The negative mass sheath surrounding a typical galaxy eﬀectively
begins to shield the positive mass from external gravitational
eﬀects. The result is that in a negative mass dominated cosmology,
positive mass galaxies would gravitationally attract each other and
merge at a slower rate than in a conventional ΛCDM cosmology.

3.2. Flattened rotation curves
The rotation curves of galaxies have been shown to remain
essentially ﬂat out to several tens of kpc. This relation has
been demonstrated using both Hα observations (Rubin & Ford
1970; Rubin, Ford, & Thonnard 1980) and radio HI observations
(Bosma 1981). We can therefore attempt to measure the eﬀect
that negative masses have on the rotation curves of galaxies.

I use similar initial conditions as in Section 3.1. However, in
order to reliably measure the rotation curve, the positive mass
galaxy is setup as a kinematically cold system with no velocity
dispersion and only a circular, orbital, velocity component. The
rotation curve was ﬁrst measured from a simulation with an
initial particle distribution that consisted solely of 5,000 positive
masses in a Hernquist model galaxy. The resulting rotation curve
is indicated by the black line in Figure 5. The rotation curve for
the positive mass galaxy clearly follows a Keplerian curve, with
solid body rotation within the scale radius of the galaxy5, followed
by a steady decline. The rotation curve was then also measured
from another simulation with an identical particle distribution for
the 5,000 positive masses, but now also surrounded by 45,000
initially uniformly distributed negative masses. The resulting
rotation curve is indicated by the red line in Figure 5. The rotation
curve for this positive mass galaxy with a negative mass halo also

5 A solid disk rotates such that the velocity increases linearly with
radius.

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

exhibits solid body rotation within the scale radius of the galaxy,
but then appears to slowly increase, remaining essentially ﬂat
out to several galactic radii albeit with a slight positive incline. I
emphasise that the only diﬀerence between these two simulations
is that one contains only positive mass matter, whereas the other
contains both positive mass matter and a negative mass halo. The
negative masses have ﬂattened the rotation curve of the galaxy.
The inclusion of matter creation would be able to provide full
dynamic equilibrium. Theoretical considerations that explain how
negative masses can ﬂatten the rotation curves of galaxies are
detailed in Section 2.3.4.

3.3. Structure formation

In a universe ﬁlled with both positive and negative masses, one
may raise the interesting question of whether the formation
of large-scale structures could possibly take place. In standard
structure formation simulations, a uniform distribution of positive
mass particles is allowed to evolve. Small initial over- and under-
densities in the particle distribution develop into ﬁlaments and
voids similar to those seen in observations (e.g. Springel et al.
2005). The same process may therefore occur when negative
masses are included. To test this hypothesis, simulations are
setup within a cube-shaped region of volume 2003. Particles
are located within this arbitrarily-sized region: 25,000 positive
mass and a further 25,000 negative mass particles – with the x, y,
and z coordinates of every particle being drawn from a uniform
distribution. The total mass within the cube is 0.0, with total
positive and negative masses of +1.0 and −1.0 respectively. The
initial velocities of all particles were equal to zero. The simulation
is scaled such that each side of the box has a length of 200 Mpc.
The simulation runs over 21.5 Gyr with a timestep of 35.9 Myr.
This provides a coarse mass resolution of 1.7 × 1017M(cid:12) ≈
300, 000 Milky Ways per particle.

The resulting particle distribution from this simulation is
shown in Figure 6. The full animated video from this simulation is
available online. As the simulation progresses, structure including
ﬁlaments and voids clearly begin to be formed. Similarly to
Section 3.1, the negative masses again naturally surround the
positive masses, providing ubiquitous dark matter haloes. The
initial particle distribution has formed a complex network that
comprises ﬁlaments, voids, and rich clusters. From these early
simulations, it is unclear which is the predominant eﬀect: the
additional pressure from the negative masses being attracted
towards positive masses leading to more rapid structure formation
than can occur in a positive mass only universe, or the mutual
repulsion between negative masses tending to counteract this and
leading to slower structure formation. Whichever the case, the
presence of negative mass particles leads to modiﬁcation of the
relative spatial distribution between ﬁlaments and voids.6

One-dimensional simulations of particles with a negative
gravitational mass have also been reported in a recent study
(Manfredi et al. 2018). More sophisticated N-body simulations
with larger numbers of particles and more sophisticated initial
conditions will be able to compare the resulting ﬁlaments and
voids from these simulations with the observed large-scale
structure in our Universe. Nevertheless, we have obtained a key

6 The consequences for structure formation could be substantially
inﬂuenced by matter creation. Negative masses that are continuously
created may feasibly have little inﬂuence on structures in the very early
universe, as within the matter creation framework one could infer that
few negative masses would exist at early-times.

result – that structure formation is possible in a universe with
negative mass.

3.4. Runaway motion

In Section 1, we discussed the peculiar concept of runaway
motion which can take place between positive–negative mass
particle pairs, with such gravitational dipoles accelerating up
to a speed equal to c. This has previously been perceived as a
problem for theories of negative masses (e.g. Bonnor 1989), partly
due to the conventional maxim that massive particles cannot
accelerate to c, and primarily due to the general reasoning that
we do not observe such high-speed particles. Both components
of this argument are however of dubious merit.

Firstly, the theory of positive–negative mass particle pairs
provides clear rules that govern such interactions. The mechanics
of these interactions are governed by the usual physical laws:
the conservation of energy and momentum remain fundamental,
and hence it is unclear why we should object to this potentially
physical law of nature on grounds of aversion alone. Secondly,
and more importantly, observations provide evidence for
signiﬁcant numbers of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays which are
known to be extragalactic in origin, although the mechanism of
their production remains a mystery (Pierre Auger Collaboration
2017). From this perspective, runaway motion is not a challenge
for negative mass models, but is rather a useful observational
constraint.

The idea that all negative masses in a universe should form
gravitational dipoles and accelerate to high energies is not
supported by the simulations presented here (which have a limited
number of particles), in which no runaway particles can be
identiﬁed. While runaway motion is a legitimate physical facet of
negative mass particle interactions, the simulations indicate that
this behaviour is only common for idealised particle pairs and
occurs more rarely as a bulk behaviour within a negative mass
ﬂuid. This is likely as the particles in such a ﬂuid are subject to
numerous counteracting forces from the surrounding medium.
One can assume that some amount of runaway particles must
still exist, although these would likely be highly scattered by
Brownian motion (e.g. Landis 1991).

One possibility is that

the softening parameter in our
simulations, (cid:15), which aﬀects short range interactions, could be
preventing the formation of polarised mass dipoles that undergo
runaway motion. To test this, the simulations were rerun with
(cid:15) = 0.0. However, no runaway particles were detected in these
simulations and the computational results remain unchanged.
One can conclude that runaway motion must be suﬃciently
rare within a bulk ﬂuid that the eﬀect does not occur with any
regularity in a simulation of 50,000 particles. Simulations with
higher numbers of particles (of the order of millions) will be
able to place numerical constraints on the runaway particle
rate, in order to provide direct observational comparisons with
ultra-high-energy cosmic ray detection rates.

4. Compatibility with observations
At this stage, I have presented a toy model which predicts
that the introduction of continuously-created negative masses to
Einstein’s ﬁeld equations can behave in such a way as to resemble
a cosmological constant. Furthermore, this model suggests that
these negative masses can ﬂatten the rotation curve of a galaxy.
This suggests that negative masses could possibly be responsible
for dark matter and dark energy. While this paper is primarily

Article number, page 11 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

Fig. 6. N-body simulations showing the formation of large-scale structure from an initially motionless, uniform, particle distribution of 25,000
positive masses (in yellow) and 25,000 negative masses (in purple). Both the initial (top) and the ﬁnal (bottom) time-steps are shown. An animated
video from this simulation is available online.
Article number, page 12 of 20

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

focussed on the theoretical and simulated consequences of such
exotic matter, for the sake of completeness I now review the
literature and consider any potential for compatibility between
the toy model and contemporary cosmological observations.

4.1. Supernovae observations of an accelerating Universe
In Section 2.3, I found that there is a degeneracy between
parameter estimates of ΩM− and ΩΛ. In a conventional ΛCDM
cosmology, where ΩM− is taken to be zero, one could therefore
infer a positive cosmological constant instead of a negative
density parameter. I note that a model with non-zero ΩM− and
zero ΩΛ would likely give a diﬀerent expansion rate to one with
ΩM− and non-zero ΩΛ.

There is strong observational evidence from high-redshift
supernovae that the expansion of the Universe is accelerating due
to a positive cosmological constant (Riess et al. 1998; Perlmutter
et al. 1999). However, inspection of these results reveals that the
observations themselves may demonstrate initial evidence for
a negative mass dominated Universe. In both of these seminal
works, the very reasonable assumption was made that all matter
in the Universe has positive mass.

For the Bayesian ﬁts in Perlmutter et al. (1999), the analysis
assumed a prior probability distribution that has zero probability
for ΩM < 0. This former work notes that throughout the
previous cosmology literature, completely unconstrained ﬁts have
generally been used that lead to conﬁdence regions which include
the part of the parameter space with negative values for ΩM. In
other words, a probability of zero was assigned to a negative mass
cosmology.

In Riess et al. (1998), a working deﬁnition was applied such
that negative values for the current deceleration (i.e. accelerations)
were generated only by a positive cosmological constant and not
from “unphysical, negative mass density”. The entire supernovae
analysis was re-run in this former work, in order to further test
this point. The paper shows that demanding that ΩΛ ≡ 0, forces
one to relax the requirement that ΩM ≥ 0 in order to locate a
global minimum in their χ2 statistic. Upon relaxing their prior,
they obtain “unphysical” values of ΩM = −0.38 ± 0.22 and
ΩM = −0.52 ± 0.20 for their two diﬀerent ﬁtting approaches.
This appears to indicate that the supernovae data are providing
evidence for a negative density contribution, ΩM = ΩM+ + ΩM− <
0. This would be evidence for a negative mass dominated
cosmology.

To assume that all mass in the Universe is positive is highly
reasonable, as there has never been a pre-detection of such exotic
material. However, as I have shown in this paper, negative mass
density may not be unphysical. In fact, one can argue that its
presence can be inferred from cosmological and galaxy rotation
data, and it may possibly be able to provide an explanation for
dark matter and dark energy. Independent and more contemporary
analyses of supernovae have also continued to use positive-
deﬁnite priors for ΩM, even with samples of up to 740 supernovae
(Knop et al. 2003; Shariﬀ et al. 2016). This further demonstrates
that this is not a systematic that can be alleviated by better data,
but rather a conceptual challenge with the data analysis.

I emphasise that by not constraining ΩM > 0, we are also
making one less assumption. One can argue that due to Occam’s
razor, a negative mass cosmology is the more parsimonious
hypothesis. I therefore suggest that it is entirely plausible that the
current observational data do not favour Λ > 0, but rather are
evidence for ΩM < 0. As shown in Section 2.3, when negative
masses are continuously created, ΩM < 0 can be equivalent to a
negative cosmological constant.

One could argue that the aforementioned papers refer to
the negative energy density of matter, which scales as 1/a3,
while the negative energy density presented here is in the form
of a cosmological constant. However, a cosmological constant
is simply one form that can be taken by the negative energy
density. The precise negative energy density is controlled by
the parameter Γ, which can vary as a function of space and
time, as detailed in Section 2.3.1. Even in the case where Γ
does provide a cosmological constant, this aﬀects only the
observationally determined magnitude of the ΩM measurements,
and not the sign which remains negative. Although beyond the
scope of this current paper, future works will be able to reanalyse
the supernovae data and obtain updated measurements of the
cosmological parameters when matter creation is fully included
within the Bayesian analysis.

4.2. CMB observations of a ﬂat Universe
One of the major outcomes from measurements of the CMB has
been locating the precise position of the ﬁrst acoustic peak. This
peak is on the degree scale, which implies that k = 0 (e.g. Spergel
et al. 2003). One could therefore suggest that this rules out the
negative mass dominated cosmology, for which it has been shown
that k = −1 (see Section 2.3).
One simple explanation is that measurements of a ﬂat
universe from the CMB are just a local eﬀect, with the k = −1
Universe being suﬃciently large that it is not presently possible
to detect any curvature. However, as shown in Section 2.3.3,
the negative mass dominated universe undergoes a cycle of
expansion and contraction with a timescale of
a large universe in which the local geometry appears to be ﬂat, it
would therefore imply an especially low value for the magnitude
of the cosmological constant – otherwise the universe would
have recollapsed before reaching such a size. In this case, a
reanalysis of the CMB is not necessary, and the hypothesis of a
k = −1 Universe could be considered compatible with existing
observations. This is of course a possibility, but could also be
perceived by a sceptical reader as a hand-waving way to allow
any geometry for the Universe – regardless of the observational
data.

(cid:112)−3π2/Λc2. For

Alternatively, if we accept the observational evidence that
the ﬁrst CMB acoustic peak demonstrates that the Universe is
ﬂat within the conﬁnes of the ΛCDM model, we could instead
consider the eﬀects that negative masses would have on the
location of the CMB peaks. Naively, in the open spatial geometry
of the negative mass dominated cosmology, the position of the
ﬁrst CMB peak would be expected to be located at a considerably
smaller angle. The ratio of angular distances for the negative
mass universe and the conventional ΛCDM universe at redshift
z ∼ 1100 (corresponding to the surface of last scattering) is

= 169.

d−
A(a)
dΛCDM
A
Hence an astrophysical object in a negative mass universe at
z = 1100 would have an observed angular size 169 times less
than in a ΛCDM cosmology. This is identical to the situation
presented for a massless cosmology in Benoit-Lévy & Chardin
(2012) (hereon BLC2012, also see Section 2.2). I now extensively
follow that earlier work. The angular position of the ﬁrst CMB
peak is deﬁned by the angle under which the sound horizon is
seen at recombination, which is given by

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)z=1100

(30)

(a)

θ =

χs(z∗)
dA(z∗) ,

(31)

Article number, page 13 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

(cid:90) t

0

χs =

dt(cid:48)
a(t(cid:48)) ,

cs

where χs(z∗) is the sound horizon, dA(z∗) is the angular distance,
and z∗ is the redshift of the last scattering surface. The equivalent
multipole is then given by la ∼ π/θ. By deﬁnition, the sound
horizon is the distance that acoustic waves can propagate in a
primordial plasma, which is typically assumed to only consist
of positive masses. Accounting for the expanding universe, the
distance of the sound horizon is given by

(32)

√
where the speed of sound cs = c/
3(1 + R), where R is a
corrective factor due to the presence of baryons (Hu & Sugiyama
1995). The value of R is related to the baryon to photon ratio η by
R = 1.1 × 1012η/(1 + z).7

dA
χs(z∗) .

The mechanism of sound generation in a negative mass and
a ΛCDM cosmology diﬀer drastically. In the standard ΛCDM
cosmology, inhomogeneities are produced during the inﬂationary
epoch. However, in a negative mass cosmology, sound waves
would be generated at the interfaces between positive and negative
mass dominated regions. BLC2012 show that the relevant time
of interest for sound generation is therefore the epoch of the
quark–gluon plasma transition which takes place at a temperature
of T ∼ 170 MeV. I note that inﬂation is itself not required in
this particular cosmology, which does not have an age or horizon
problem (see Section 2.2). An extended exposition can be found in
BLC2012. The aforementioned paper shows that acoustic waves
would propagate in the plasma while positive and negative masses
are in contact. The expression for the angular position of the ﬁrst
CMB peak is then given by
la ∼ π
(33)
Using this expression, BLC2012 obtain la ∼ 160 for the multipole
of the acoustic scale. The standard measurement is la ∼ 300
(Spergel et al. 2003). Rather than a discrepancy by a factor
of ≈ 169, there is substantial cancellation between the larger
geometrical term (from the open spatial geometry of a negative
mass universe) and the larger sound horizon (from the slow
evolution of the expansion rate before recombination). Within
a factor of approximately two, a negative mass universe can
therefore predict the location of the ﬁrst CMB peak and hence
may be consistent with CMB observations. However, this model
assumes that there is repulsion between positive and negative
masses that leads to a subsequent gravitational decoupling,
whereas the negative masses proposed in this paper obey the
weak equivalence principle. In the latter case, sound can be
continuously generated up until the present epoch. As this model
contains numerous approximations, there appears to be the
potential for a negative mass universe to be fully consistent with
observations of the CMB. It is quite surprising in a negative mass
cosmology with negative spatial curvature, that the ﬁrst CMB
acoustic peak can naturally emerge at the correct scale – a simple
back of the envelope approximation is already within a factor
of two and consistent with the typically interpreted ﬂat spatial
geometry.

In an eﬀort to identify any plausible mechanism that due to
the nature of negative masses may allow for further adjustment
of the CMB peaks, we can also speculate about various other
compressive and expansive eﬀects in the early Universe. In

7 One may argue that tight-coupling of photons to baryons could erase
all anisotropies, however such a hypothesis would critically assume a
purely positive mass cosmology.

Article number, page 14 of 20

the standard ΛCDM model, sound waves can be generated
from overdensities in the primordial plasma that originated
from quantum ﬂuctuations enlarged during inﬂation. These
overdensities would gravitationally attract matter, while heat from
photon–baryon interactions would seek thermal equilibrium and
create an outward pressure. Counteracting gravity and pressure
thereby give rise to oscillations analogous to sound waves. In a
negative mass dominated universe, it is apparent that the sound
generation mechanism would be modiﬁed. There would be two
opposing eﬀects: repulsive pressure from negative masses within
an overdensity would tend to erase anisotropies, while conversely
negative mass haloes would tend to surround positive mass
baryons and increase both the eﬀective gravitational attraction and
the subsequent collapse of these overdensities. Matter creation
would also exert a further inﬂuence. While these additional
eﬀects could modify the physics of sound generation in the early
Universe and the predicted anisotropies in the CMB, the precise
eﬀects would depend upon the particle physics of the negative
masses themselves, which is beyond the scope of this current
paper.
In addition to this modiﬁcation of CMB anisotropies, the
sound waves used to derive la ∼ 160 are generated at the
interfaces between positive and negative mass dominated regions.
In these regions, the positive and negative masses would tend
to interact. These interactions could lead to runaway motion
and possible annihilation of positive–negative mass particle
pairs, which would further aﬀect the precise mechanism of
sound generation. However, such eﬀects are not considered
here. Further consideration of these additional plausible physical
eﬀects, together with theoretical constraints for the second and
third CMB peaks, can form a robust test to either validate or rule
out the cosmic presence of negative mass.

In summary, while CMB modelling has provided an
exceptional ﬁt to observational data, the parameterisation of
a model is only ever as good as the selected model itself. I
therefore am suggesting that CMB physics has chosen a ‘correct’
model – a Universe with a cosmological constant and cold dark
matter. However, it is possible that the true nature of dark matter
and dark energy may have remained elusive due to the critical
assumption that both of the ΛCDM components have positive
energy. By allowing for energy to also be negative, it may be
possible to show that this modiﬁed ΛCDM model can be fully
compatible with the CMB. Nevertheless, I again emphasise that a
reanalysis of the CMB is not essential for this purpose, as the
Universe could simply be large with minimal local curvature.

4.3. Galaxy cluster observations
Galaxy clusters have also played a signiﬁcant role in establishing
the standard ΛCDM model of cosmology (e.g. Allen, Evrard, &
Mantz 2011). Such observations make a critical assumption – that
clusters are standard buckets that contain a representative mix
of the constituent components of the cosmos. However, if the
entirety of ‘empty’ space is ﬁlled with negative masses that are
continuously popping into existence, this would prevent clusters
from being standard buckets and would suggest that they are
intrinsically-biased towards positive mass regions of the Universe.
Within the presented toy model, galaxy clusters therefore do
not represent standard buckets. Although not standard buckets,
one could still anticipate that at least some observations of
a few galaxies or galaxy clusters may have found hints of a
negative mass. In fact, “puzzling results” in clusters such as
negative masses have been discussed in the literature (Andreon,
Punzi, & Grado 2005). For example, Chandra observations of

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

the merging cluster Abell 2034 found hints of a negative mass
and therefore did not plot those data (Kempner, Sarazin, &
Markevitch 2003), regions of the mass proﬁle in the galaxy
NGC 4636 yielded “unphysical” negative masses (Johnson et
al. 2009), in the NGC 3411 galaxy group the total mass was
found to decline with increasing radius – requiring material
with negative mass (O’Sullivan et al. 2007), measurements of
galaxy clusters using the Sloan Digital Sky Survey yielded data
that indicate a negative mass in poor clusters with fewer than
ﬁve galaxies (Hansen et al. 2005), a CMB cluster lensing study
found a cluster with “a fairly signiﬁcant preference for negative
mass” (Baxter et al. 2017), and a number of strong and weak
gravitational lensing studies have discussed or found indications
of negative masses in reconstructed mass distributions (Evans
& Witt 2003; Clowe, Gonzalez, & Markevitch 2004; Clowe et
al. 2006; Liesenborgs, De Rijcke, & Dejonghe 2006; Diego et
al. 2007). Perhaps these ﬁndings can be trivially explained by
mundane observational biases and systematics. Nevertheless,
given that we have identiﬁed other possible evidence for the
inﬂuence of negative masses on other spatial scales, the repeated
observation of negative mass in clusters appears to be yet another
piece of evidence that allows us to infer the plausible existence
of this exotic material.

4.4. Overall compatibility with ΛCDM
The current concordance cosmology is that of ΛCDM, which
contains cold dark matter and a cosmological constant. In many
respects, the negative mass dominated cosmology is a ΛCDM
model – with positive–positive mass interactions corresponding
to baryons, positive–negative mass interactions corresponding
to dark matter, and negative–negative mass interactions
corresponding to dark energy. The standard Ωb + ΩCDM + ΩΛ
can therefore be reparameterised as Ω++ + Ω+- + Ω--, thereby
providing a form of modiﬁed ΛCDM. It is not immediately clear
whether the relative ratios of 4.9%, 26.8%, and 68.3% for Ωb,
ΩCDM, and ΩΛ respectively, would still hold upon a thorough
observational reanalysis.

However, a key ﬁnding for the negative mass dominated
cosmology is that the underlying universe is predicted to have
k = −1, ΩM < 0, and Λ < 0. Claiming a cosmology with negative
spatial curvature and negative cosmological constant would seem
to be a heretical, renegade, and insane point of view. After all,
the conventional ΛCDM cosmology (which is spatially ﬂat with
a positive cosmological constant, i.e. k = 0, ΩM > 0, and Λ > 0)
is based upon cutting-edge observational evidence derived from
supernovae, the CMB, and galaxy clusters. While this is true, the
interpretation of these observations has been derived using the
critical assumption that all mass in the Universe is positive. While
it is beyond the scope of this paper to attempt to fully recreate
the entire impressive body of research into ΛCDM over the last
30 years, we have allowed ourselves to play devil’s advocate
and to have revisited the most key observational results, while
also allowing mass to be negative. As scientists, we aim to be
motivated purely by the scientiﬁc evidence alone and endeavour
to remain entirely uninﬂuenced by conﬁrmation bias. We have
thus allowed ourselves to indulge in this unconventional thought
experiment.

One can ask whether this negative mass cosmology could
possibly be our cosmology. In Sections 4.1 to 4.3, I have shown
that the cosmological parameters in the current concordance
ΛCDM model can possibly be explained as a simple artefact
that originates from the assumption that all matter in the
Universe has positive mass. By allowing for negative masses

within ΛCDM itself, I have surprisingly found that there is
observational evidence that potentially supports and possibly
even appears to favour a negative mass cosmology. I do not
claim an all-encompassing or rigorous proof of a negative
mass cosmology, but simply highlight
the toy model
raises numerous interesting questions. Future work will be able
to further test the compatibility with additional cosmological
observations.

that

5. Future considerations
There are several outstanding theoretical challenges for a theory
such as the one presented in this paper. I here provide some
brief speculation as to the possibilities and future theoretical
considerations.
• It may be possible to directly validate this theory via the direct
capture and detection of a negative mass particle. Particles
undergoing runaway motion would be highly scattered due to
Brownian motion (see Section 3.4), resulting in an observed
isotropic distribution on the sky. At face-value, this is
consistent with the origin of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays,
and could lead to particles with energies above the Greisen–
Zatsepin–Kuzmin (GZK) limit, such as the so-called Oh My
God particle.
• Although this paper only considers particles with identical
inertial and gravitational mass, there are also a number
of other negative mass models in which the inertial or
gravitational mass alone may have an inverted sign. These
models have recently been presented in Manfredi et al.
(2018), which provides one-dimensional structure formation
simulations for these various scenarios. One such model is
the Dirac-Milne universe (Benoit-Lévy & Chardin 2012),
which explores the consequences of antimatter with negative
gravitational mass (also see Section 2.2). Experiments
underway at CERN are expected to soon provide veriﬁcation
or refutation of these alternative negative mass models. It is
possible that multiple forms of negative mass may possibly
exist, and observational constraints will play an important
role in testing these various scenarios.
• It seems that the proposed negative mass ﬂuid can be modelled
as either matter or vacuum energy. It has previously been
proposed that space-time arises as a form of large-scale
condensate of more fundamental objects, that are typically
of an unknown nature (e.g. Liberati & Maccione 2014). One
could therefore speculate that the negative masses could be
interpretable as a quantised form of energy associated with
space-time itself.
• The introduction of negative masses to the vacuum can
also potentially provide a solution to the cosmological
constant problem. The predicted vacuum energy can be a
factor of 10123 larger than the observed value (e.g. Hobson,
Efstathiou, & Lasenby 2006). By invoking negative masses,
the vacuum energy density can now take on essentially any
value depending upon the precise cancellation of positive and
negative energy states. If the negative oscillator modes exactly
balance the positive modes, then ρ
• In theories of quantum gravity, gravitation is mediated by the
graviton – a massless, spin-2, boson. This means that any pair
of negative masses would attract, and not repel as suggested in
this theory. However, there are also theoretical arguments that
gravitons cannot, and will not ever, be detected experimentally
(Rothman & Boughn 2006). There appear to be two options:
either it is possible that the graviton could be modelled as a

quant
vac = 0.

Article number, page 15 of 20

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

bound state of a positive and a negative mass, in a theory of
composite gravity or some other mechanism which provides
a modiﬁcation of graviton properties. Alternatively, this could
also indicate that the proposed theory cannot be modelled by
real, physical, particles, but rather by the presence of eﬀective
negative masses within a superseding theory.
• Electrically-charged negative masses may tend to coalesce
into highly charged clumps, eventually reaching a critical
mass at which all other masses would be gravitationally
repelled. This has previously been brieﬂy described (Landis
1991). However, observational constraints on the abundance
of negative mass compact objects indicate that such compact
clumps cannot constitute a sizeable mass budget of the
Universe (Takahashi & Asada 2013). One suggestion is that
negative mass particles are always electrically neutral and
remain in a diﬀuse form.
• No attempt has been made to reconcile the presented theory
with the standard model of particle physics. Can a viable
Higgs mechanism allow for a negative mass? Is there a way
to introduce negative masses into the standard model that
could allow for the combination of fundamental forces at high
energies, in a grand uniﬁed theory? Would supersymmetry
be required? Is it possible that a negative mass particle
travelling backwards in time may be measured as having
a positive mass? These questions would be interesting future
avenues that could be explored further by the particle physics
community.

6. Summary and conclusions
I have considered the introduction of negative masses and matter
creation to cosmology, both via a theoretical approach and via
computational simulations. Neither negative masses nor matter
creation are new ideas. When considered individually, neither
idea can explain modern astrophysical observations. This paper
has reinvoked these two previous concepts and combined them
together.

Commonly presumed issues with negative masses include
incompatibility with general relativity (however, this was shown
to be compatible in e.g. Bondi 1957), and the vacuum instability
(which is not a bug, but rather a feature of the proposed theory,
see Section 2.3.1). By reintroducing the creation term into general
relativity, but only for negative masses, it is possible to construct
a toy model that has the potential to possibly explain both dark
energy and dark matter within a simple and uniﬁed theoretical
framework. Due to matter creation, a negative mass ﬂuid can have
ω = −1. These hypothesised negative masses can push against
positive mass galaxies and galaxy clusters, thereby modifying
their dynamics. Under this theory, the cosmos contains a dynamic,
motive, dark ﬂuid, with dark matter and dark energy being
modelled as the observed eﬀects from positive mass matter
‘surﬁng’ on this expanding ﬂuid. As an illustrative concept,
empty space-time would behave almost like popcorn – with more
negative masses continuously popping into existence.

From an astrophysical perspective, this cosmological theory
surprisingly has some successes in describing observations.
The derived cosmological model requires both negative spatial
curvature, k = −1, and a negative cosmological constant, Λ <
0. While such a proposal is a renegade and heretical one, it
has been suggested that negative values for these parameters
may possibly be consistent with cosmological observations,
which have critically always made the reasonable assumption
that mass can only be positive. When not making this extra
assumption, Occam’s razor indicates that the introduction of

Article number, page 16 of 20

negative mass may possibly be a more parsimonious theory
than the standard concordance ΛCDM model with k = 0 and
Λ = 0. Considerable future work will be needed in order to fully
explore the implications and prospects for this modiﬁed ΛCDM
toy model.

The theory, simulations, and observations suggest that this

particular cosmology has the following properties:

1. The geometry of the universe in this cosmology has negative

spatial curvature, k = −1.

2. The continuous creation of negative masses can resemble a

cosmological constant, with Λ < 0.

3. Negative masses can give rise to a time-variable Hubble

parameter.

4. Negative masses can be intrinsically attracted towards regions
of positive mass, thereby leading to an increase in density
that manifests itself as a dark matter halo that extends out to
several galactic radii.

5. Due to mutual self-repulsion between negative masses, dark
matter haloes formed from negative masses are not cuspy, and
could thereby possibly provide a resolution of the cuspy-halo
problem.

6. The rotation curves of galaxies can be ﬂattened by the
negative masses in the surrounding dark matter halo, however
the curve is also predicted to increase linearly in the outermost
regions of galaxies. This may be consistent with previous
observational ﬁndings, which have found that most rotation
curves are rising slowly even at the farthest measured point
(e.g. Rubin, Ford, & Thonnard 1980).

7. Structure formation appears to be able to take place in
a positive and negative mass universe,
leading to the
conventional suite of ﬁlaments, voids, rich clusters, and ﬁeld
galaxies.

8. Supernovae observations of a positive cosmological constant
made the reasonable critical assumption that all mass is
positive. Upon relaxing this assumption, the supernovae data
of Riess et al. (1998); Perlmutter et al. (1999) themselves
derive a negative mass density in the Universe.

9. It appears that the ﬁrst acoustic peak in the CMB could
naturally emerge at the correct scale in a negative mass
cosmology. Several additional physical eﬀects on the CMB
need to be fully considered, and determining the eﬀects that
negative masses have on the second, third, and higher order
CMB peaks can enable a robust test to either validate or rule
out the presence of negative mass in the Universe.

10. In this cosmology, negative masses are distributed throughout
all of space-time, so that galaxy clusters cannot represent
standard buckets. A number of galaxy cluster observations
appear to have inferred the presence of negative mass in
cluster environments.

11. The introduction of negative masses can lead to an Anti-
de Sitter space. This would correspond to one of the most
researched areas of string theory, the Anti-de Sitter/Conformal
Field Theory correspondence, and if applicable to our own
Universe, would suggest that string theory may possibly have
direct physical applications.

12. Negative masses are predicted to produce a vacuum instability,
which would suggest the vacuum itself is undergoing a slow
and stable decay. In this cosmology, the universe would
be taking on an increasingly negative energy state due to
the continuous creation of negative masses. While such a
vacuum instability is normally considered to be a theoretical
insuﬃciency of negative masses, in this particular case it is
not a bug, but rather a feature of the proposed cosmology.

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

This accumulation of evidence could possibly indicate that
while we cannot currently directly detect negative masses, we
may have been able to infer the presence of these negative masses
via their gravitational eﬀects. These eﬀects would seem bizarre,
peculiar, and unfamiliar to us, as we reside in a positive mass
dominated region of space. As the interactions between positive
and negative masses are mediated by gravitation, the eﬀects are
typically fundamentally related to the physical scale – generally
requiring a suﬃciently large accumulation of positive mass in
order for negative masses to inﬂuence the dynamics of a physical
system. One aspect that is particularly preposterous is the concept
of runaway motion, but as quantum mechanics has shown, many
absurd concepts constitute real, testable, and repeatable facets of
nature.

There appears to be the potential and scope for this concept
to be fully tested in order to make complete comparisons
with observational data. A number of testable predictions have
been made, including using cutting-edge telescopes such as the
SKA, constraining the CMB acoustic peaks, and attempting
direct detection from ultra-high-energy cosmic rays. Meanwhile,
laboratory tests may be able to conﬁrm whether antimatter
could possibly be responsible for these gravitational eﬀects –
although it would seem that a far more exotic material would
likely be required. In addition, future state-of-the-art N-body
simulations on GPUs with larger numbers of particles, that allow
for the creation of negative masses, will help to provide a reﬁned
comparison with observations.

I here emphasise that several well-accepted theories can be
modelled using non-real or eﬀective negative masses. Air bubbles
in water can be modelled as having a negative eﬀective mass
(Brennen 1995). For holes in semiconductor theory, electrons
at the top of the valence band have a negative eﬀective mass
(Ashcroft & Mermin 1976). The Casimir eﬀect can be modelled
using a region of negative energy density (Morris, Thorne, &
Yurtsever 1988). Hawking radiation can be modelled using virtual
negative mass particles that fall into the black hole (Hawking
1975). In the dark energy alternative of phantom energy (with
ω < −1), the excitations of the phantom ﬁeld are negative mass
particles (Caldwell 2002; Carroll 2004). Even Bose–Einstein
condensates have observable regions with negative eﬀective mass
(Khamehchi et al. 2017). While the results in this paper appear
to be consistent with vacuum states that have negative energy
density, it is possible that these ﬁndings may imply a superseding
theory that in some limit can be modelled by negative masses. In
this way, the toy model could possibly be compatible with our
own Universe, which may still satisfy the weak energy condition.
I suggest that a negative mass Universe is also a beautiful one.
It naturally implies a symmetry, in which all physical systems are
polarised into positive and negative states. A polarised cosmology
that contains both positive and negative masses can literally bring
balance to the Universe. This polarisation of the cosmos leads to
a form of modiﬁed ΛCDM which seems to have the potential to
quite possibly be able to describe our Universe in a more complete
fashion than standard ΛCDM, with the distinct advantage that
negative masses can oﬀer a physical explanation for the natures
of dark energy and dark matter. As it was Einstein that was the
ﬁrst to suggest that the cosmological constant could be modelled
using negative masses, it seems that he potentially may have
made two blunders. By not pursuing his own prediction, he may
possibly have missed the chance to predict the existence of the
mysterious dark aspects of our Universe. While it is certain that
the negative masses discussed in this paper are gravitationally
repulsive, it might be that the concept of negative mass is the
most repulsive feature of all. Nevertheless, we should seriously

consider the possibility that the perplexing nature of the dark
Universe may feasibly have remained a mystery for 100 years
due to a simple and pervasive sign error.

Appendix A: Density evolution of a negative mass

ﬂuid in a non-expanding space

I here consider the bulk properties of a negative mass ﬂuid in a
non-expanding space. To begin, I make a simplifying assumption
and consider the eﬀect of a cloud of massive particles in three
dimensions, assuming spherical symmetry. The evolution of this
massive ﬂuid occurs in a dilute plasma, so that screening is
unimportant and the particles interact via gravitational forces.
I will consider the negative mass solutions for this ‘gravitational
plasma’. While the negative mass solutions can be interpreted as
the motion of negative mass particles, the solutions can also be
considered as the ﬂow of a negative mass ﬂuid.

The majority of the matter in the Universe is known to exist
as a low-density electrical plasma: solids, liquids and gases
are uncommon away from planetary bodies. The cosmological
principle therefore indicates that one can reasonably model the
Universe as an isotropic, homogeneous, cloud of plasma. In
this case, however, it is as a gravitational plasma, with particle
interactions occurring between positive and negative masses
rather than positive and negative electrical charges. I note that the
expansion of space itself is not included in this unconventional
plasma model of the Universe. In this Section, I extensively
follow Ivlev (2013), which provides similar solutions for a
cloud of electrically charged particles that I will here modify
for application to gravitating particles. I begin with a 1D planar
problem and then develop analytical solutions for the 3D case.
I neglect the pressure term in the equation of motion, assuming
that thermal eﬀects are negligible. Since the coordinate and
density dependence of the particle mass, M, makes the problem
non-linear (and likely intractable), I consider the case where
M is constant or an explicit function of time. These solutions
therefore hold in cases where matter is constantly being created
or annihilated.

Appendix A.1: Planar 1D case
I employ the Lagrangian mass coordinates (s, tL) (Zel’dovich &
Raizer 2002), where the Lagrangian time is tL = t and

(cid:90) x

0

s =

dx(cid:48)n(x(cid:48)

, t)

is the coordinate expressed via the local number density n(x, t). I
assume that the system remains symmetric with respect to x = 0,
this means that v(0, t) = 0. The material and spatial derivatives
can then be transformed from Eulerian coordinates using the rules

∂
∂t

+ v ∂
∂x

=

∂
∂tL

,

and

∂
n∂x

=

∂
∂s .

I now look at the resulting continuity and momentum
equations for the density, n, and velocity, v, as well as Gauss’
law for the self-consistent gravitational ﬁeld, g, produced by

Article number, page 17 of 20

(A.1)

(A.2)

(A.3)

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

massive particles. For clarity, I omit the subscript L for time,
yielding
∂n−1
∂t

∂v
∂s ,

(A.4)

=

∂v
∂t

+ νv = g,

(A.5)

(A.7)

(A.8)

(A.10)

(A.11)

= −4πGM.

∂g
∂s
Here M is the mass of individual particles, and ν is the damping
rate due to gas friction (i.e. kinematic viscosity). The number
density of masses, n, is given by N/V where N is the total number
and V is the volume, or equivalently by ρ/M where ρ is the mass
density.

(A.6)

I take the time derivative of Eq. (A.4), substitute ∂2v/∂s∂t

from Eq. (A.5), and use Eq. (A.6) to get
∂2n−1
∂t2

= −4πGM,

∂n−1
∂t

+ ν

which has a general solution
n−1(s, t) = c1(s) + c2(s)e−νt − 4πGM

t,

ν

where the constants c1 and c2 are to be determined from initial
conditions. If the initial density is constant, n(x, 0) = n0 within
the range |x| ≤ x0, and so I obtain n−1
I now substitute ∂n−1/∂t from Eq. (A.8) into Eq. (A.4) and

= c1 + c2.

0

integrate to obtain
v(s, t) = −4πGM

ν

(cid:90) s

0

s − νe−νt

c2(s(cid:48))ds(cid:48)

.

(A.9)

If the particles were initially at rest, v(s, 0) = 0, then I obtain
c2 = −4πGM/ν2. Plugging this into Eq. (A.8) and using n−1
=
c1 + c2, I also obtain c1 = n−1
+ 4πGM/ν2. The solutions of
Eqs. (A.4)–(A.6) are therefore

0

0

1 − ω2

p
ν2

n(t)
n0

=

v(s, t) = − ω2

p
ν

s
n0

(cid:16)

νt − 1 + e−νt(cid:17)−1
(cid:16)
1 − e−νt(cid:17)

,

,

(A.12)

g = −4πGMs,
√
4πGMn0 is the initial plasma frequency of the
where ωp =
massive cloud. These solutions are also valid when M is an
explicit function of time, for example due to matter creation
or matter annihilation. I have therefore now obtained general
solutions for (i) the local number density, (ii) the ﬂow velocity,
and (iii) the gravitational ﬁeld. Eqs. (A.10)–(A.12) are all
described as functions of the Lagrangian mass coordinates,
(s, t). I note that via this mathematical representation of ﬂuid
ﬂow we are tracking the locations of individual ﬂuid particles,
rather than using ﬁxed-space Eulerian coordinates. The use of
Lagrangian coordinates allows us to consider the ﬂuid from a

Article number, page 18 of 20

ν

=

=

2

≈

≈

(cid:34)

more cosmological perspective, since we are interested in the
history of individual particles as a function of time.

pt
ν

pt2
2

(A.13)

(for νt (cid:28) 1).

−1
−1

(cid:34)
1 − 4πGMn0t

1 − ω2
1 − ω2

(cid:35)−1
1 − 4πGMn0t2
(cid:35)−1

We ﬁrst discuss the local number density as a function of
time, by considering an asymptotic analysis of Eq. (A.10). At
early-times, νt (cid:28) 1, and using a Maclaurin series expansion for
e−νt yields
n(t)
n0
At later-times, νt (cid:29) 1, and e−νt ≈ 0 which leads to
n(t)
(A.14)
n0
Consequently, at νt ∼ 1, the time-scaling switches from n ∝ t−2
(νt (cid:28) 1) to n ∝ t−1 (νt (cid:29) 1). I note that this does not consider
matter creation or annihilation. A more general solution could
be considered where either the annihilation of positive masses
or the creation of negative masses leads to a constant density
evolution with time. Assuming no matter creation or annihilation,
the evolution of Eqs. (A.13) and (A.14) are dependent on whether
M is positive (in which case the density increases with time) or
negative (in which case the density decreases with time).

(for νt (cid:29) 1).

In the case where M > 0, the gravitational plasma of positive
masses collapses through mutual gravitational attraction – with
the density increasing over time. However, the density cannot
increase without bound. As the ﬂuid becomes suﬃciently dense,
the positive mass particles will begin to interact on a scale
equivalent to an eﬀective particle radius. Furthermore, the plasma
will eventually cease to be suﬃciently dilute that the screening
is unimportant and particles will begin to experience short-range
interparticle interactions. The density will then evolve following
some other form, of which we are not here concerned. Although
I highlight that this is a 1D treatment in a non-expanding space,
this solution describes the gravitational evolution of a positive
mass cloud.

In the case where M < 0, the gravitational plasma of negative
masses now undergoes a gravitational explosion – with the ﬂuid
becoming more dilute and the density decreasing over time. Such
a cloud would expand persistently due to gravitational repulsion.
Although this is also a 1D treatment in a non-expanding space,
this solution describes the gravitational expansion of a negative
mass cloud. In the case of no matter creation, we can see that
the expansion is characterised by a uniform stretching, with the
density being constant in space and decreasing monotonically
with time. Consequently, Eq. (A.1) is reduced to a simple relation
s = n(t)x and the cloud boundary xb(> 0) is determined by
the condition sb = n(t)xb(t) = n0x0. However, a more general
solution that includes matter creation can also allow the density of
negative masses to remain constant as a function of time, and can
be trivially parameterised by treating M as M(t) and equivalently
ρ = n(t)M(t) = constant in Eqs. (A.13) and (A.14). In this case of
matter creation, the expansion is still characterised by a uniform
stretching, and if matter is created at a suﬃcient rate, the density
can remain constant in both space and time.

I now discuss the ﬂow velocity, v, as a function of time, by
considering an asymptotic analysis of Eq. (A.11) when M < 0. It
can be determined that v increases linearly with x and attains
a maximum at xb. When νt (cid:29) 1, the maximum velocity at
the boundary tends to a constant value of vb = x0ω2
p/ν, and
corresponds to a balance of the gravitational and frictional forces.
As ν tends towards zero, I obtain

(cid:16)

1 − e−νt(cid:17)

= ω2

px0t,

vb = lim
ν→0

− ω2

p
ν

x0

(A.15)

J. S. Farnes : A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter

which shows that in the absence of friction, v grows linearly with
time at the boundary.

One could ask what fate awaits overdensities and structure
that may exist within this expanding negative mass ﬂuid. I note
that the functions c1(s) and c2(s) in Eq. (A.8) can also be derived
for a more general case, when the initial density n0(x) is not
constant, or the initial velocity v0(x) is not zero. This leads to
c1(s) + c2(s) = n−1
0(s)/ν, where
0(s) ≡ dv0(s)/ds can be obtained from n0(x) and
n0(s) and v(cid:48)
v0(x) respectively, by employing the relation x(s) from Eq. (A.1).
Consequently, in the limit νt (cid:29) 1, the solutions for n and v do
not depend on the initial conditions and tend to the behaviour of
Eqs. (A.10) and (A.11) at later-times.

0 (s) and c2(s) = −4πGM/ν2 − v(cid:48)

Appendix A.2: Spherically symmetric 3D case
I have shown that the solution for a 1D cloud has distinct
characteristic features. In homogeneous steady initial conditions,
the density of the expanding cloud remains homogeneous and
the velocity increases linearly towards the cloud boundary. This
is asymptotically true for arbitrary initial conditions. One could
therefore hypothesise that these characteristics are independent
of dimensionality and will hold in a spherically symmetric 3D
cloud.

To test this hypothesis, I continue to follow Ivlev (2013) and
write the analogous 3D equations to Eqs. (A.4)–(A.6) in Eulerian
coordinates, which yields

∂n
∂t

+

1
r2

∂(r2nv)

∂r

= 0,

∂v
∂t

+ v ∂v
∂r

+ νv = g,

= −4πGMn.
(cid:33)3

(cid:32) r0

,

n(t)
n0

=

rb(t)

r

rb(t)

v(r, t) =

˙rb(t),

∂(r2g)

1
r2
I use the following starting point for the solutions to n, v, and g:

(A.18)

∂r

GMn(t)r,

g(r, t) = −4π
(A.21)
3
with r ≤ rb (for simplicity, I again consider a homogeneous
initial distribution). These initial solutions ensure that Eqs. (A.16)–
(A.18) are satisﬁed identically.

By substituting Eq. (A.20) into Eq. (A.17), then substituting
the solutions for g from Eq. (A.21) and n(t) from Eq. (A.19), I
obtain

¨rb(t) + ν˙rb(t) +

ω2
p
3

r3
0

rb(t)2

= 0.

¨N + ν ˙N +

ω2
p
3

N−2 = 0,

I now deﬁne, N(t) = rb(t)/r0, ˙N(t) = ˙rb(t)/r0, and ¨N(t) = ¨rb(t)/r0,
and derive

which can be more generally written as

¨N + ν ˙N +

N−D+1 = 0.

ω2
p
D

(cid:16) n(t)

(cid:17)−1/D

N(t) = rb(t)/r0 ≡ (cid:16) n(t)

where the dimensionality of the space is represented by D =
1, 2, 3. Similarly from Eq. (A.19), I can more generally write that
. Consequently, when D = 1 then

(cid:17)−1. Subsequently, Eq. (A.24) reduces to Eq. (A.7)

N(t) =
and I obtain the 1D solutions from Eqs. (A.10) to (A.12). When
D = 2, 3, then one cannot solve Eq. (A.24) analytically. However,
some special cases can be considered via an asymptotic analysis.
Firstly, I can consider Eq. (A.23) in the case when νt (cid:29) 1,

n0

n0

such that ¨N is negligible. This yields

(A.24)

(A.25)

3k1 − ω2

pt
ν

−1

,

≈

n(t)
n0

2
3 ωpt

(cid:16)√
(cid:16) n(t)

which as the initial density n(0) = n0, at t = 0, this leads to
k1 = 1/3 which provides an identical solution to Eq. (A.14)
for the 1D case. Hence, I can conclude that asymptotically, the
density evolution does not depend on the dimensionality and that
our initial result holds when D = 3. Hence for any case where
ν (cid:44) 0 – and independent of the initial conditions, the density
decays asymptotically as n ∝ t−1.

Secondly, I can consider Eq. (A.23) in another special case,
when ν = 0, so that the equation can be directly integrated. In
p(1 − N−1), which has the
(cid:114)
this case, the ﬁrst integral is ˙N2 = 2
solution
N(N − 1) + ln

N − 1

(A.26)

(cid:112)

3 ω2

N +

(cid:17)

√

=

(cid:17)−1/3. The time evolution at small t is then

n0

such that N(t) =
similar to Eq. (A.13), while the evolution at large t is given by
n ∝ t−3. I note that this 3D frictionless case is likely the most
relevant for a cloud of negative masses, which should have low
friction due to their mutual repulsion. We therefore can consider
the density evolution of a perfect ﬂuid of negative masses, with
no viscosity, to be characterised by n ∝ t−3.

In conclusion, the expansion of a cloud/ﬂuid of negative mass
particles is described by analytical solutions. In the case of no
matter creation, we can see that the expansion is characterised by
a uniform stretching, with the density being constant in space and
decreasing monotonically with time. In the case where matter is
being created, the expansion is still characterised by a uniform
stretching, but if matter is created at a suﬃcient rate then the
density can remain constant in both space and time. Irrespective
of whether matter creation is taking place, the density distribution
remains homogeneous across the cloud, and the velocity increases
linearly towards the cloud boundary. I note that this exercise
is characterised within a non-expanding space and therefore
provides the local properties for a cloud of negative masses, rather
than full cosmological solutions. The precise analytical solutions
for the expansion of this ﬂuid would be modiﬁed in proximity to
positive masses. In particular, such a gravitational plasma will
begin to exhibit screening eﬀects similar to those observed in
an electrical plasma. It has been suggested that negative mass
screening eﬀects would have the ability to attenuate gravitational
waves, with the plasma being opaque to frequencies below the
plasma frequency (Mbarek & Paranjape 2014).
Acknowledgements. I am extremely grateful to my dear wife, Kristina, for all her
kind advice in drafting this document and for enduring many boring monologues

Article number, page 19 of 20

(A.16)

(A.17)

(A.19)

(A.20)

(A.22)

(A.23)

A&A proofs: manuscript no. theory_dark_universe_arxiv

Kraniotis G. V., Whitehouse S. B., 2001, Measurement of the Cosmological
Constant from Galactic Velocity Rotation Data, in Sources and Detection of
Dark Matter and Dark Energy in the Universe, ed. D. B. Cline (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, New York), 66

Landis G. A., 1991, Journal of Propulsion and Power, 7, 304
Liberati S., Maccione L., 2014, PhRvL, 112, 151301
Liesenborgs J., De Rijcke S., Dejonghe H., 2006, MNRAS, 367, 1209
Maartens R., Abdalla F. B., Jarvis M., Santos M. G., 2015, arXiv:1501.04076
Maldacena J., 1999, IJTP, 38, 1113
Manfredi G., Rouet J.-L., Miller B., Chardin G., 2018, PhRvD, 98, 023514
Mbarek S., Paranjape M. B., 2014, PhRvD, 90, 101502
Morris M. S., Thorne K. S., Yurtsever U., 1988, PhRvL, 61, 1446
Navarro J. F., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1997, ApJ, 490, 493
O’Sullivan E., Vrtilek J. M., Harris D. E., Ponman T. J., 2007, ApJ, 658, 299
Paliathanasis A., Barrow J. D., Pan S., 2017, PhRvD, 95, 103516
Pan S., de Haro J., Paliathanasis A., Slagter R. J., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 1445
Perlmutter S., et al., 1999, ApJ, 517, 565
Petit J. P., d’Agostini G., 2014, Ap&SS, 354, 611
Pierre Auger Collaboration, et al., 2017, Science, 357, 1266
Planck Collaboration, et al., 2014, A&A, 571, A16
Planck Collaboration, et al., 2016, A&A, 594, A13
Planck Collaboration, et al., 2016, A&A, 594, A14
Prigogine I., Geheniau J., Gunzig E., Nardone P., 1988, PNAS, 85, 7428
Prokopec T., 2011, arXiv:1105.0078
Riess A. G., et al., 1998, AJ, 116, 1009
Riess A. G., et al., 2016, ApJ, 826, 56
Rothman T., Boughn S., 2006, FoPh, 36, 1801
Rubin V. C., Burstein D., Ford W. K., Jr., Thonnard N., 1985, ApJ, 289, 81
Rubin V. C., Ford W. K., Jr., Thonnard N., 1980, ApJ, 238, 471
Rubin V. C., Ford W. K., Jr., 1970, ApJ, 159, 379
Schuster A., 1898, Nature, 58, 367
Shariﬀ H., Jiao X., Trotta R., van Dyk D. A., 2016, ApJ, 827, 1
Spergel D. N., et al., 2003, ApJS, 148, 175
Springel V., et al., 2005, Nature, 435, 629
Takahashi R., Asada H., 2013, ApJ, 768, L16
Tryon E. P., 1973, Nature, 246, 396
Whitehouse S. B., Kraniotis G. V., 1999, arXiv:astro-ph/9911485
Witten E., 1981, Commun. Math. Phys., 80, 381
Ya. B. Zel’dovich & Yu. P. Raizer, 2002, Physics of Shock Waves and High-

Temperature Hydrodynamic Phenomena (Dover, New York)

about negative masses over a long time span. I also thank the anonymous referee
for thorough comments, which helped to substantially improve the paper. I would
also like to thank Takuya Akahori for helpful comments on structure formation
in a negative mass ﬁlled Universe that inspired further simulations, and both Wes
Armour and Will Potter for kindly providing constructive and insightful feedback
on a draft of this paper. Any mistakes in this hopefully interesting paper are
entirely my own.

References
Aad G., et al., 2012, PhLB, 716, 1
Abbott L. F., Deser S. D., 1982, Nucl. Phys. B, 195, 76
Abbott B. P., et al., 2016, PhRvL, 116, 061102
Allen S. W., Evrard A. E., Mantz A. B., 2011, ARA&A, 49, 409
Andreon S., Punzi G., Grado A., 2005, MNRAS, 360, 727
Ashcroft N. W., Mermin N. D., 1976, Solid State Physics (Holt, Reinhart, and

Winston, New York)

Baxter E. J., et al., 2017, arXiv:1708.01360
Benoit-Lévy A., Chardin G., 2012, A&A, 537, A78
Bergstrom L., Danielsson U., 2000, arXiv:astro-ph/0002152
Bondi H., 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys., 29, 423
Bondi H., Gold T., 1948, MNRAS, 108, 252
Bonnor W. B., 1989, General Relativity and Gravitation, 21, 1143
Bonvin V., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 465, 4914
Bosma A., 1981, AJ, 86, 1825
Brennen, C. E., 1995, Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics (Oxford Univ. Press)
Burkert A., 1995, ApJ, 447, L25
Caldwell R. R., 2002, PhLB, 545, 23
Carroll S. M., 2004, Why is the Universe Accelerating?, in The New Cosmology:
Conference on Strings and Cosmology; The Mitchell Symposium on
Observational Cosmology (AIP Conference Proceedings), 743, 16

Clowe D., et al., 2006, A&A, 451, 395
Clowe D., Gonzalez A., Markevitch M., 2004, ApJ, 604, 596
de Blok W. J. G., 2010, AdAst, 2010, 789293
Diego J. M., Tegmark M., Protopapas P., Sandvik H. B., 2007, MNRAS, 375,

958

Efstathiou G., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1138
Einstein A., Comment on Schrödinger’s Note ‘On a System of Solutions
for the Generally Covariant Gravitational Field Equations’, Physikalische
Zeitschrift, 19, 165 (1918). Translated by Engel A. in The Collected Papers
of Albert Einstein, Volume 7, The Berlin Years: Writings, 1918-1921.
(Princeton University Press, April 2002). http://einsteinpapers.press.
princeton.edu/vol7-trans/.

Einstein A., Do Gravitational Fields Play an Essential Part in the Structure
of the Elementary Particles of Matter?, Königlich Preußische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, Sitzungsberichte, Berlin, (1919). Translated by Engel
A. in The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, Volume 7, The Berlin Years:
Writings, 1918-1921. (Princeton University Press, April 2002). http://
einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu/vol7-trans/.

Evans N. W., Witt H. J., 2003, MNRAS, 345, 1351
Ferreira P. G., Starkman G. D., 2009, Science, 326, 812
Forward R. L., 1990, Journal of Propulsion and Power, 6, 28
Friedmann A., 1924, ZPhy, 21, 326
Gibbons G. W., Hawking S. W., Horowitz G. T., et al., 1983, Commun. Math.

Phys., 88, 295

A., 2005, ApJ, 633, 122

Hansen S. M., McKay T. A., Wechsler R. H., Annis J., Sheldon E. S., Kimball

Hawking S. W., 1965, RSPSA, 286, 313
Hawking S. W., 1975, Commun. Math. Phys., 43, 199
Hawking S. W., Page D. N., 1982, CMaPh, 87, 577
Hernquist L., 1990, ApJ, 356, 359
Hobson M. P., Efstathiou G. P., Lasenby A. N., 2006, General Relativity

(Cambridge Univ. Press)

Hossenfelder S., 2008, PhRvD, 78, 044015
Hoyle F., 1960, MNRAS, 120, 256
Hoyle F., Narlikar J. V., 1964, RSPSA, 282, 178
Hu W., Sugiyama N., 1995, ApJ, 444, 489
Hubble E., 1929, PNAS, 15, 168
Ivlev, A. .V., 2013, Physical Review E, 87, 025102
Johnson R., Chakrabarty D., O’Sullivan E., Raychaudhury S., 2009, ApJ, 706,

Kempner J. C., Sarazin C. L., Markevitch M., 2003, ApJ, 593, 291
Khamehchi M. A., Hossain K., Mossman M. E., Zhang Y., Busch T., Forbes

M. M., Engels P., 2017, PhRvL, 118, 155301

Knop R. A., Aldering G., Amanullah R., Astier P., Blanc G., et al., 2003, ApJ,

980

598, 102

Article number, page 20 of 20

