Issue x (August)

PROGRESS IN PHYSICS

Volume xx (2018)

The Janus Cosmological Model and the ﬂuctuations of the CMB

J.P. PETIT

E-mail: Jp.petit@mailaps.org

It is shown than, in the framework of the Janus Cosmological Model the gravitational
instability which occurs in the negative sector makes an imprint in the positive one,
which corresponds to the CMB inhomogeneities. So that their characteristic wavelength
gives the ratio of the space scale factors of the two sectors, which diﬀer from two orders
of magnitude. Subsequently the speed of light in the negative sector is ten times highers
than ours. So that, given to distant points, if the travel between them is managed along
the negative geodesics paths, the corresponding travel time is reduced by a factor one
thousand.

model.

model.

Introduction

the Earth (it will fall).

So, JCM ﬁts the classical relativistic observation, as presented in former papers [2, 3].

1
A cosmological model must take account of the observations. From this point of view a recent paper [1] showed that the the
Janus Cosmological Model (JCM) ﬁts many.
• JCM explains the absence of observation of the so called primeval antimatter, opposite to the mainstream ΛCDM
• JCM describes precisely the nature of the invisible components of the universe, opposite to the mainstream ΛCDM
• JCM predicts that the antimatter produced in laboratory will react as the matter with respect to the gravitational ﬁeld of
• Because positive and negative matter are repelling each other, the negative matter in the solar system is almost zero.
• JCM suggests a clear schema for VLS formation [4] when the mainstream model ΛCDM seems to struggle to give one.
• JCM explains the observed strange eﬀect due to the Great Repeller [5]. The measured escape velocities of galaxies are
due to the presence of an invisible repellent cluster made of negative mass, located in the centre of the big void. The
mainstream model supporters suggest that such a repellent eﬀect could be due to some kind of a hole in the dark matter
ﬁeld of the universe (positive masses). But, if the gravitational instability leads to the setting up of massive clusters,
it does not provide ant scheme for such void formations. So that the mainstream model ΛCDM does not provide any
explanation of the observation.
• JCM explains the conﬁnement of galaxies and their ﬂat rotation curves ( [1, 6]). Mysterious dark matter is no longer
• After JCM the intensity of the observed gravitational lensing eﬀect is mainly due to the negative matter that surrounds
galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Mysterious dark matter is no longer required, while the mainstream model ΛCDM
does.
• JCM suggests an explanation of the low magnitude of very young galaxies : this would be due to the negative lensing
• JCM explains the spiral structure of galaxies, due to dynamical friction with the surrounding mass ( [1, 6]). The model
• JCM explains the acceleration of the universe [1] . The so-called dark energy is the one associated to the negative mass
• JCM explains the homogeneity of the primeval universe. ( [2, 16]).
JCM is deﬁnitively not a simple or pure product of mathematical physics. But it represents a deep paradigmatic change,
on geometrical grounds. In the Einstein’s model the universe is considered as a manifold, whose geometry corresponds to a
single metric ﬁeld , solution of a single ﬁeld equation, without cosmological constant :

weakening, when their light are crossing the negative mass clusters located at the center of the big voids.

ΛCDM don’t give any model explaining the spiral structure.

required, while the mainstream model ΛCDM does.

content through E = ρc2, with ρ < 0.

Such model automatically generates the unmanageable runaway eﬀect [7, 8], just because, if imbedded in a given gravitation
ﬁeld (the term Tµν), positive and negative masses react the same way (a single metric solution gµν). If we give up such

Rµν − 1
2

R gµν = χTµν

J.P. Petit. Janus Cosmological Model and CMB ﬂuctuations

(1)

1

Volume xx (2018)

PROGRESS IN PHYSICS

Issue x (August)

restrictive and non-logical hypothesis it means that, imbedded in a given gravitation ﬁeld the geodesics of the two species
derive from two metrics ﬁelds g(+)
µν , solutions of two coupled ﬁeld equations, as derived from Lagrangian method
[9, 10].

µν and g(−)

(cid:115)
(cid:115)

T (+)
T (−)

µν

µν

+

+




g(−)
g(+) T (−)

µν

g(+)
g(−) T (+)

µν

µν − 1
R(+)
2

R(+) g(+)
µν

= +χ

µν − 1
R(−)
2

R(−) g(−)

µν

= −χ

(2)

The physical meaning of the presence of the two square roots in the second members is the energy conservation requirement.

µν dominates, in other T (−)

We have a single manifold M4, with two tensor ﬁelds T (+)
µν , which refer to positive and negative mass contents.
In some regions T (+)
µν dominate. In others the two are zero. In any case we ﬁnd everywhere two
families of geodesics, as derived from the metric g(+)
µν . The ﬁrst refers to the paths of positive mass particles, and
positive energy photons (null positive geodesics). The second refers to the paths of negative mass particles, and negative
energy photons (null negative geodesics).

µν and g(−)

µν and T (−)

On pure geometric grounds the negative mass objects are invisible to us, because they emit negative energy photons that
positive mass devices cannot capture. And vice versa. The positive and negative masses interact only trough (anti) gravita-
tion. The classical Newton’s law comes from the Einstein’s equation (1) through Newtonian approximation (small curvature,
velocities small with respect to the speed of light, quasi Lorentzian metric).

Similarly from the system (2) we get ( [3, 11]) the following Newtonian, and antinewtonian interaction laws:

• Positive masses do attract together, through Newton’ law
• Negative masses do attract together, through Newton’s law
• Opposed masses do repel each other, through anti Newton’s law.

This interaction scheme ﬁts the action-reaction principle.

The nature of the invisible components of the universe are determined from dynamic group theory ( [6, 12]). They are a
copy of the ordinary antiparticles, with negative energy. This schema ﬁts initial Sakharov’s idea [13–15].

As evoked in [17], JCM may produce an original scheme for galaxies’ formation.
The structures of the positive and negative sectors are fairly diﬀerent. After discoupling, with ρ− >> ρ+, spheroidal globular
clusters form ﬁrst, the matter being conﬁned in the remnant place, getting an alveolar structure. The compression of positive
matter along ﬂat structure is optimum for radiative cooling and Jeans’ instability triggering, giving galaxies, stars and heavy
atoms. At the contrary the negative mass antimatter is conﬁned in spheroidal objects, that can be compared to huge proto-stars
that will never ignite because their cooling time is longer that the age of the universe. As a consequence no galaxies, no stars,
no heavy atomes and planets can form. Life is absent from such negative world.

2 A short remark about another model with negative mass
The model of L.Blanchet and G. Chardin is based on the Einstein’s equation, so that the runaway eﬀect belongs to it, which
does not worry the authors.
Their scheme suggests, without theoretical grounds, that the primeval antimatter could have a negative mass.

From the Einstein’s equation the interaction laws between positive and negative masses is the following ( which contains
the runaway eﬀect) :

• Positive masses mutually attract through the Newton’s law
• Negative masses mutually repel through ”anti-Newton’s law”

2

J.P. Petit. Janus Cosmological Model and CMB ﬂuctuations

Issue x (August)

PROGRESS IN PHYSICS

Volume xx (2018)

• Positive masses are repelled by negative masses
• N´egative masses are attracted by positive masses

which contradicts the action-reaction principle. Howevever L.Blanchet and G.Chardin think that, thanks to such interaction
scheme the primeval (negative mass) antimatter could have survived somewhere.

About cosmological evolution the authors opt for the Dirac-Milne model [17], which corresponds to a constant null gravita-
tional ﬁeld, with a constantly global zero mass. Then the expansion is linear in time, which contradicts the recent observation
of the acceleration of the expansion.

JCM shows that there are two forms of antimatter. The positive mass, we can call it ”Dirac antimatter” (C-symmetrical
of our matter) reacts as the ordinary matter, if imbedded in a gravitational ﬁeld This is the antimatter we produce in labora-
tory, so that we predict that the antimatter weighted if the alpha experiment will fall down.

The negative mass antimatter corresponds to the primeval antimatter and is located between galaxies. We may call it ”Feyn-
mann antimatter” ( PT-symmetrical from our ordinary matter).

3 How to determine the parameters in the negative sector
According to the (cid:28) variable constants (cid:29) evolution schema ( [2,16]) the two sectors correspond to two diﬀerent sets of so-called
constants, time plus scale parameters :

(cid:110)
(cid:110)

c(+)

; G(+)

; h(+)

e(+)

; m(+)

; µ(+)
0

; a(+)

c(−)

; G(−)

; h(−)

e(−)

; m(−)

; µ(−)

0

; a(−)

;

;

Where are space and time factors. In both sectors the so-called constants and space and time factors experience ”joint gauge
variations” which keep the equations of physics invariant. It means that if one chooses one of the eight parameters the other
seven can be expressed using that one. For example :

c(+) ∝

c(−) ∝

1√
a(+)

1√
a(−)

; G(+) ∝ 1
a(+)

; G(−) ∝ 1
a(−)

; h(+) ∝ (a(+))3/2

e(+) ∝

; m(+) ∝ a(+)

t(+) ∝ (a(+))3/2

; h(−) ∝ (a(−))3/2

e(−) ∝

; m(−) ∝ a(−)

t(−) ∝ (a(−))3/2

What is the ontological justiﬁcation of such process? It makes no necessary to invoke inﬂation to justify the observed
homogeneity of the primeval universe. In eﬀect, the cosmological horizon becomes an integral ( [2, 16]) :

√
a(+)

√
a(−)

;

;

(cid:90)

horizon(+) =

c(+) dt(+) ∝ a(+)

Same thing in the (cid:28) negative sector (cid:29).
A question arises immediately : when does this generalized gauge process era ends? This will be examined in a next paper.
J and t(−)
Have a look on the Jeans’ lengths L(+)
. In this gauge process all the velocities, including
thermal velocities, vary like the speed of light of their corresponding sector :

J and times Jeans t(+)

J and L(−)

J

t(+)(cid:111)
t(−)(cid:111)

;

;

;

;

(so that

< V(+) >∝ c(+)

< V(−) >∝ c(−)

J (cid:39) a(+)
L(+)

J (cid:39) a(−)
L(−)

J (cid:39) t(+)
t(+)

J (cid:39) t(−)
t(−)

J.P. Petit. Janus Cosmological Model and CMB ﬂuctuations

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

3

Volume xx (2018)

PROGRESS IN PHYSICS

Issue x (August)

The ﬂuctuations, due to gravitational instability are not observable in a given sector, by observers who live in.
Anyway, in a fully ionized plasma the strong link to the radiation backgrounds prevents clustering of matter in both sectors.
What about the (cid:28) gas of photons (cid:29) ?

4 Photons react to gravitational ﬁeld
This gives the gravitational lensing eﬀect. On another hand the photons contribute to the curvature. If the inertial mass of the
photon is zero, we can introduce an individual equivalent gravitational mass of the photon :

m(+)
ϕ

=

m(−)

ϕ

=

h(+) v(+)

c(+)2 ∝ a(+) ∝ m(+)
h(−) v(−)
c(−)2 ∝ a(−) ∝ m(−)

We may consider than the gravitational instability occurs in the ”gaz of photons” but the corresponding Jeans’ length becomes
:

(cid:112)

L(+)
J

=

c(+)

(cid:39) a(+)

4 π G(+) ρ(+)

(cid:112)

L(−)

J

=

c(−)

4 π G(−) ρ(−)

(cid:39) a(−)

again, such ﬂuctuations in one sector cannot be observed by an observer that belongs to, because it extends beyond the
corresponding cosmological horizon. But, from a conceptual point of view, this links to the idea of so-called (cid:28) multivers (cid:29).
Beyond our cosmological universe we may consider that other (cid:28) universes (cid:29) extend, with diﬀerent sets of physical constants
and scale factors. But, as such they should obey the same equations, their histories would not be diﬀerent from ours, giving,
in the corresponding positive sectors, atoms, stars, galaxies, planets and life.
We get an inﬁnite set of coupled (positive/negative mass) portions of the universe.
If the gravitational instability cannot occur in our sector of the universe, before decoupling, we have the imprint of such
primeval instability, which occurs in the negative sector. We think that this produces the light inhomogeneities in the CMB.
The basic ﬂuctuation extent is two order of magnitude smaller than the whole angular extent. It gives directly the order of
magnitude of the ratio of the space scale factoirs. In the negative sector the ﬂuctuations have a characteristic wavelength , so
that the measure of the imprints in our sector gives the order of magnitude according to :

a(−)
a(+) ≈ 1

100

c(−)
c(+) ≈ 10

As a conclusion, if we consider two points A and B of the manifold, we have two diﬀerent lengths, which diﬀer from the
same ratio.

5 Link to the interstellar travel problem
During the gauge process era the two sectors experience evolution of their constants according to:

a(+) c(+)2 = a((cid:48)) c((cid:48))2 = constant

Combining with (10) we get :

According to the Einstein’s model (1), interstellar travels at sub-relativistic velocity implies durations fairly incompatible
with human lifetime. But if some distant civilizations could invert the mass of a vehicle (plus passengers) and travel along
geodesics of the negative sector at V(−) < c(−) the gain in time travel would correspond to three order of magnitude. So that a
travel to, or from the nearest systems could be possible.

4

J.P. Petit. Janus Cosmological Model and CMB ﬂuctuations

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Issue x (August)

PROGRESS IN PHYSICS

Volume xx (2018)

6 Conclusion
We review the many observational conﬁrmations of the Janus Cosmological Model. We deal with the origin of the ﬂuctuations
in the CMB. Based on our primeval gauge process era, which explains the homogeneity of the primeval universe, without
need to the inﬂation schema, we look at the gravitational instability during that era and show that the corresponding Jeans’s
length follows the extension of the cosmological horizon in both sectors. We notice that, even if we cannot make observation
beyond the horizon, other portions of the universe could be ruled by diﬀerent sets of so-called constants and scale factors.
This links to the idea of (cid:28) Multiverse (cid:29). But, according to ou scheme such sets should derive from the same set of equations,
so that the physical, an biological evolution in such sectors should give the same patter (atoms, stars, planets, life).
We point out that such primeval gravitational instability, occurring in the negative sector, make an imprint in ours, and that
corresponds to the observed ﬂuctuations in the CMB.
Then it gives the measure of the ration of the two scale factors a(+)
c(+) ≈ 10.
According to our gauge process scheme it corresponds to c(−)
As a conclusion it shortens the travel time, for sub-relativist journeys, by a factor 1000, which makes the impossibility of
travels to nearest stars questionable, if mass inversion technique would be someday possible.

a(−) ≈ 100.

References
1. G.D’Agostini and J.P.Petit, Constraints on Janus Cosmological model from recent observations of supernovae type Ia . Astrophysics and Space Science

2018.

2. J.P.Petit, Twin universe cosmology, Astrophysics And Space Science, 222, 273, 1995.
3. J.P.Petit and G.D’Agostini, Negative mass hypothesis and the nature of dark energy. Astrophysics And Space Science, 353, Issue 2, 2014.
4. V. de Lapparent, M.H.Geller and J.P.Huchara, A slice of the Universe. Astrophysical Journal, Vol. 102 , 1986, L1-L2
5. Y.Hoﬀman, D.Pomarede, R.B. Tully and H.M. Courtois, The Dipole Repeller, Nature Astronomy, 0036, 2017
6. J.P.Petit, P.Midy and F. Landsheat. Twin matter against dark matter. International meeting on astrophysics and Cosmology (cid:28) Where is the matter ? (cid:29).

Marseille 2001 june, 25-29

7. H.Bondi. Negative mass in General Relativity. Review of Modern Physics, Vol.29 , N3, 1957.
8. W.B. Bonnor, Negative mass in General Relativity. General relativity and Gravitation. Vol. 21, N11, 1143-1157, 1989
9. S.Hossenfelder, Antigravitation. Physics Letters B, 636 : 119-125, 2006
10. S.Hossenfelder, A bimetric theory with exchange symmetry. Physical Review, D78 (044015), 2008
11. J.P.Petit and G.D’Agostini, Cosmological Model with interaction positive and negative masses and two diﬀerent speeds of light, in agreement with the

observed acceleration of the universe.Modern Physics Letters A, vol. 29, N34 , 2014

12. J.M.Souriau, Structure des Syst`emes Dynamiques, Paris, Dunod. ISSN 0750-2435. 1070 and Birkhauser, Boston, 1997
13. A.D.Sakharov, ZhETF Pis’ma 5 : 32 ; JETP Lett. 5 : 24 ( 1967 )
14. A.D.Sakharov, ZhETF Pis’ma 76 : 1172 (1979) ; JETP 49 : 594 (1979)
15. A.D.Sakharov, (1980). Cosmological Model of the Universe with a Time Vector Inversion. ZhETF (Tr. JETP 52, 349-351) (79): 689–693
16. J.P.Petit, Cosmological model with variable velocity of light. Modern Phys Letters A3, 1988, pp. 1527
17. J.P.Petit, The missing mass problem. Il Nuovo Cimento, Vol.109:697–710, July 1994
18. A. Benoit-Levy and G.Chardin, Introducing the Dirac-Milne universe. arXiv :1110.3954v2 (astro-ph) 2 feb 2012.

J.P. Petit. Janus Cosmological Model and CMB ﬂuctuations

5

