	

1	

When	the	mathematician	David	Hilbert	tried	in			
1916	to	build	the	first	Theory	of	Everything	
Jean-Pierre	Petit1	
Assisted	by	Patrick	Marquet	
for	the	translation	from	German	
					The	present	article	is	based	on	the	two	publications	made	by	Hilbert	in	1915	
and	1916	([1],	[2]).	Before	entering	into	the	heart	of	the	matter,	it	is	necessary	to	
specify	the	context	in	which	these	works	were	realized.		
				We	are	in	1915.	At	that	time,	only	two	forces	at	work	in	the	universe	were	
known:	the	electromagnetic	force	and	the	force	of	gravity.	The	other	two:	the	
strong	interaction	force,	binding	the	components	of	the	atomic	nuclei,	and	the	
weak	force,	responsible	for	beta	radioactivity,	would	not	be	discovered	until	
much	later.		
				The	upheaval	introduced	by	Albert	Einstein,	with	his	special	relativity,	was	
finally	accepted,	at	least	by	some	advanced	minds,	since	it	is	the	only	one	to	
account	for	the	experiment	initiated	by	the	American	Abraham	Michelson	in	
1887,	which	concludes	that	the	value	of	the	speed	of	light	is	invariant,	regardless	
of	the	reference	frame,	fixed	or	immobile,	in	which	we	operate.	No	other	credible	
interpretation	of	the	speed	of	light	was	found.			
				However,	this	idea	took	time	to	become	one	of	the	pillars	of	modern	physics,	so	
much	so	that	when	the	Nobel	Prize	was	awarded	in	1921	to	its	author,	it	was	not	
for	this	idea	but	for	his	interpretation	of	the	photoelectric	phenomenon.	Einstein	
is	considered	the	inventor	of	the	word	"photon".		
	
What	is	the	discovery	of	relativity?		
				It	is	based	on	a	new	vision	of	the	universe,	with	the	appearance	of	a	junction	
between	two	words,	leading	to	the	compound	word	space-time.	Einstein,	thus,	
can	be	considered	as	the	inventor	of	space-time.		
				Previously,	space	and	time	were	dissociated	objects.	Space	is	considered	as	
Euclidean.	That	is	to	say	that	the	theorem	of	Pythagore	in	three	dimensions,	as	if	
we	locate	the	position	of	two	points	A	and	B	with	the	help	of	an	orthonormal	
frame	of	reference	by	giving	them	coordinates		
}		et		   xB, yB, zB
the	distance	between	them	is:		
																																																								
1	Former	Director	of	Research	at	CNRS	(plasma	physics,	astrophysics,	cosmology)	
jppetit1937@yahoo.fr		

{
   xA, yA, zA

}	

{

	

2	
				Time	is	measured	differently,	with	clocks,	with	mechanical	systems.	Before	
Einstein,	nobody	would	have	had	the	idea	to	join,	to	mix	two	"objects"	as	different	
as	space	and	time,	to	combine	meters	and	seconds.		
				Behind	all	this	there	is	a	geometrical	vision	of	the	cosmos.	If	we	remove	a	
dimension	of	space,	the	z	coordinate,	for	example,	we	have	the	following	diagram:		
	

)2 + yB − yA

)2 + zB − zA

xB − xA

  L =

)2

	

(

(

(

	

Fig.1	:	Pre-relativist	space	

					As	for	the	time	t	=	0,	it	obviously	refers,	in	1915,	to	the	instant	of	the	creation	of	
the	universe,	"by	God".	At	that	time,	before	the	irruption	of	special	relativity	in	
the	mode	of	science	and	physics,	the	question	"what	is	then	the	geometry	of	
space-time?	It	cannot	be	identified	with	a	Riemanian	mathematical	space,	defined	
by	a	metric.	Otherwise,	what	sense	can	be	given	to	the	following	formula,	defining	
a	"length	»	s		:		
(1)																																																									  ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2 + a2dt 2		
where	 a	would	be	a	constant,	in	the	form	of	a	velocity,	so	that	we	can	add	up	
similar	quantities.	This	metric	is	then	devoid	of	physical	meaning.		
} ∈!3	
The	space	coordinates	are	obviously	real				:	
				What	about	time?	It	would	never	occur	to	anyone	to	imagine	a	negative	time,	
nor	would	it	occur	to	anyone	to	imagine	a	retrochronic	time	flow.	This	variable	t	
therefore	belongs	to	the	set	  t ∈! +.		
				Albert	Einstein's	discovery	has	however	a	very	clear	geometrical	interpretation,	
through	the	space	invented	by	the	Russian	mathematician	Hermann	Minkowski.		

{
    x, y,z

	

3	

	
Fig.	1	:	Hermann	Minkowski	(1864-1909)	

					It	is	him	who	imposes	this	idea	of	a	space-time	continuum,	defined	by	the	way	
in	which	expresses	the	length,	according	to	a	tool,	qualified	by	the	French	
mathematician	Henri	Poincaré	of	pseudo-metric:		
  ds2 = c2dt 2 − dx2 − dy2 − dz2	
				The	constraint,	imposed	in	1905	by	Einstein's	special	relativity,	is	expressed	in	
a	simple	and	clear	way:	it	is	enough	to	say	that	s	is	real.	Thus	it	is	necessary	that:	
  c2dt 2 − dx2 − dy2 − dz2 ≥ 0			ou	:				
				This	implies	that	the	speed	is	less	than	 c	.	To	this	metric,	we	associate	its	
signature,	in	the	form	of	the	sequence	of	its	signs:	
 (+ − − − )	
				When	Einstein	undertook	to	describe	gravitation	using	a	bilinear	form,	if	we	
note	by	  x1, x2 , x3 , x4
}		the	coordinates	of	one	of	the	points	of	the	tangent	space,	
}	locating	it	in	space	and	x4	being	the	time	coordinate,	it	seems	logical	
to	write,	indifferently		:		
2 ≥ 0	
				This	choice	appears	for	example	in	the	article	published	in	1915	by	Einstein,	
referring	to	his	calculation	of	the	advance	of	Mercury's	perihelion	[3]	.		

{
{
  x1, x2 , x3

≤ c2	

dx2 + dy2 + dz 2

  ds2 = dx4

v2 =
  

2 − dx2

2 − dx2

2 + dx4

2 − dx3

2 − dx3

2 − dx1

dt 2

2	ou	  ds2 = − dx1
	

	

4	

Some	preliminaries	before	tackling	Hilbert’s		
conception	of	the	geometry	of	space-time.		

Fig.2	:	Einstein's	signature	choice	

	
					It	is	easy	to	see	that	this	choice	of	signature	is	ubiquitous	in	the	papers	of	all	
authors	who	published	papers	prior	to	Hilbert's	1916	paper.	Let	us	quote	
Schwarzschild,	Weyl,	Droste,	etc.		
	
				A	2D	geometric	object	can	be	described	by	its	metric.	The	metric	of	the	sphere	
is	for	example:		
(1)																																																						  ds2 = R2( dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2 )	
				A	metric	that	is	totally	regular,	whatever	the	values	of	the	two	variables.	How	
can	we	say,	on	the	basis	of	this	simple	fact,	that	it	is	a	2-sphere?	Well,	we	perform	
}	to	the	set		
a	change	of	coordinate	  θ = arcsin(r / R)	to	shift	from	the	set		  θ , ϕ
}.	Then	we	get	:		
(2)																																																					
				We	then	notice	that	for	r	=	R	the	first	term	has	a	zero	denominator.	We	have	
thus	created	a	coordinate	singularity.	Another	remark:	for	r	<	R	the	term	ds2	is	
negative.	The	element	of	length	ds	becomes	pure	imaginary.	This	is	normal:	we	
are	outside	the	sphere.	For	these	2D	metrics,	defining	objects,	surfaces,	we	see	a	
thread	emerging.	The	metric	is	a	polynomial	of	degree	two,	a	bilinear	form,	
expressed	with	a	certain	set	of	coordinates,	a	priori	real.	If	the	length	element	is	
also	real,	it	is	because	our	definition	interval	has	been	judiciously	chosen.					

R2 −r 2 dr 2 + r 2dϕ	

{
   r , ϕ

ds2 =
  

R2

{

	

R2

ds2 =
  

{
   r , ϕ , z

R2 −r 2 dr 2 = dr 2 + dz2	

5	
Otherwise,	where	ds	is	imaginary,	we	are	simply	outside	the	surface.	Of	course,	in	
a	formal	way,	we	can	always	consider	studying	the	behavior	of	this	object,	
outside	this	interval	of	definition.	But	then	we	break	our	rule	of	the	game.	We	are	
no	longer	in	the	world	of	the	real,	but	in	the	world	of	the	complex.		
			Let's	go	back	to	the	question	we	asked.	How	do	we	know	that	(1)	and	(2)	
represent	a	sphere?	To	do	this,	we	will	plunge	it	into	a	three-dimensional	space
}.			The	physicist	recognizes	the	"cylindrical"	coordinates	of	a	3D	
Euclidean	space.	In	this	imbedding	operation	the	length	element	must	be	
expressed	in	the	same	way,	especially	on	meridian	curves	with	constant	.	We	will	
therefore	write:		
(2)																																																			
				It	is	a	differential	equation	which	immediately	gives	us	the	link	between	r	and	z.	
Its	integration	gives	us:		
(3)																																																																  r 2 + z2 = R2		
				This	surface	is	thus	generated	by	the	rotation	of	a	circle	centered	at	the	origin	
of	the	coordinates,	around	the	oz	axis.	It	is	indeed	a	sphere	S2.	We	could	do	the	
same	thing	starting	from	two	expressions	of	the	metric	of	the	torus	T2:		
	
(4)				  
2 + r 2dϕ2	
2dθ2 + (Rr + rgcosθ )2dϕ2			et				
				In	these	expressions	we	recognize	the	radius	rg	of	the	generating	circle	of	the	
torus,	the	radius	of	this	small	circle	whose	center	turns	around	an	axis	passing	by	
its	plane,	along	a	circle	of	radius	 Rr.	On	the	left	we	have	opted	for	coordinates	
}	which	are	not	a	problem.	On	the	right,	switching	to	the	representation	
system	   r , ϕ
}	we	have,	as	for	the	sphere,	created	coordinate	singularities	for	
the	two	values	that	cancel	the	denominator	of	the	first	term	of	the	second	:	
(5)																																																							r	=	Rr	+	rg					et						r	=	Rr	-	rg	
Moreover	the	ds	is	real	only	if	this	denominator	remains	positive:		
(6)																																																														Rr	-	rg		<		r	<	Rr	+	rg						
otherwise	we	are	outside	the	surface.	An	imbedding	operation	in	the	three-
dimensional	Euclidean	space	allows	to	discover	geometrical	properties	which	
will	make	appear	the	mode	of	generation	of	the	torus.	But	nobody	is	interested	in	
the	geometrical	properties	of	this	object,	for	example	for	 r	<	(Rr	-	 rg)		.	If	we	
decided	to	do	so,	we	would	leave	the	mode	of	the	real	to	enter	a	strange	complex	
geometry,	which	then	has	nothing	to	do	with	tangible	2D	objects.		
				These	are	objects	defined	by	metrics	whose	signs	are	all	positive.	We	will	call	
them	 elliptic	metrics.	This	is	true	for	an	unlimited	number	of	dimensions,	let's	
consider	for	example	the	3D	object:	

− r 2 + 2 r Rr + rg

ds2 =
  

{
  θ , ϕ

ds2 = rg

2 − Rr

dr 2

{

	

{

6	
(7)																																																					  ds2 = dr 2 + r 2( dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2 )	
				There,	using	adequate	coordinate	changes	to	make	the	metric	of	a	Euclidean	
space	reappear:		
(8)																																																											  ds2 = dx2 + dy2 + dz2	
				Thus	we	would	find	our	familiar	representation	space.	In	(7)	the	points	are	only	
marked	in	3D	polar	coordinates.	But,	by	studying	the	object	with	the	help	of	a	
family	of	surfaces	with	constant	 r,	fitting	together	like	Russian	dolls,	we	could	
"read"	the	object	with	the	help	of	this	folding	method.	This	space	has	geodesics	
which	are	the	infinite	number	of	lines	that	we	can	draw	in	this	3D	space.	Among	
these	are	the	straight	lines	coming	from	the	origin,	which	are	perpendicular	to	
these	surfaces	S2	which	are	spheres.	The	coordinates	  r , θ , ϕ
}	are	 Gaussian	
coordinates,	a	concept	to	which	Hilbert	will	refer	in	what	follows.		
We	can	leave	the	3D	Euclidean	by	imagining	3D	spaces,	3D	hypersurfaces	defined	
by:		
(9)																																												  ds2 = f (r)dr 2 + r 2( dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2 )	
and	we	would	have	the	same	folding	system	by	spheres.	We	will	consider	the	
particular	case:		
(10)																																				
				For	the	moment	there	is	no	time	variable.	In	the	perspective	of	an	extension	of	
what	we	said	about	2D	surfaces	to	3D	hypersurfaces,	defined	by	their	metric,	
from	which	we	can	build	their	geodesic	curves,	we	will	consider	the	existence	of	
this	hypersurface	in	its	ds	is	real,	so	when	ds2	>	0.	This	gives	a	defining	space	such	
that	r	>	Rs	.	By	making	r	constant	we	can	still	leaf	through	the	object	with	a	family	
of	spheres	nested	one	inside	the	other	like	Russian	dolls.	But	there	is	then	a	
sphere	of	minimal	area	  4π Rs
2	which	corresponds	to	the	metric:		
2( dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2 )																																		
(11)																																																			  ds2 = Rs
				It	is	a	throat	sphere.	But	what	happens	in	r	=	Rs?	The	denominator	of	the	first	
term	of	the	second	member	becomes	zero.	Is	this	sphere	singular?		No,	it	is	still	a	
coordinate	singularity.	We	can	eliminate	it	by	changing	the	variable:		
(12)																																																									  r = Rs ( 1+ Ln chρ )		
The	metric	thus	becomes:		
)	
(13)												

(
)2 dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2

+ r 2( dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2 )

(
2 1+ Ln chρ

th2ρdρ2 + Rs

dr 2
Rs
r

Rs > 0

ds2 =

1−

	

  

ds2 = Rs
  

2 1+ Ln chρ
Ln chρ

	

7	
				There	is	then	no	limit	in	the	definition	space,	and	can	vary	from	minus	infinity	
to	plus	infinity.	The	metric	potentials	are:	
(14)	

2 1+ Ln chρ
Ln chρ

gρρ = Rs
(
2 1+ Ln chρ
(
2 1+ Ln chρ

gθθ = Rs
gϕϕ = Rs
  

th2ρ
)2
)2 sin2θ

	

g

∫∫

				How	did	this	operation	make	this	metric	regular?	When			the	hyperbolic	cosine	
is	unity	and	its	logarithm	is	then	zero.	So	the	denominator	in	the	first	term	of	the	
second	member	is	always	zero.	Yes,	but	the	same	is	true	for	the	hyperbolic	
tangent.	If	we	do	a	series	development	in	the	neighborhood	of	 ρ = 0	you	will	see	
that	  
gρρ → 2 .	This	hypersurface	is	therefore	perfectly	regular.	Its	throat	sphere	
for	 ρ = 0	has	a	minimum	area	equal	to	  4π Rs
2.	To	calculate	this	"2D	volume"	(a	
surface)	you	must	do:		
dθdϕ		
(15)																																																														 
				But	you	can	convince	yourself	that	the	non-contractibility	of	the	object	is	still	
present.	All	you	have	to	do	on	this	sphere	is	to	make	 θ = π / 2		and	to	vary	ϕ	from	
0	à	 2π		.	You	get	a	finite	perimeter	  p = 2π R s	.	What	happened?	You	are	no	
longer	in	your	comfortable	three-dimensional	Euclidean	 representation	 space	
(the	only	one	you	have	in	fact,	to	build	a	mental	image).		
				This	hypersurface	is	therefore	a	three	dimensional	manifold,	equipped	with	an	
elliptic	Riemanian	metric.	In	this	new	system	of	axes	the	determinant	is	never	
zero.		This	means	that	this	hypersurface	is	orientable.	At	any	point	one	can	define	
a	vector	product	and	the	"corkscrew	rule",	which	goes	with	it,	will	be	the	same	at	
all	points.	It	is	obviously	painful	for	the	neurons	to	consider	this	kind	of	"space	
bridge"	which	creates	a	passage	between	two	Euclidean	3D	spaces	(which	are	like	
"one	inside	the	other").	We	can	call	it	a	"3D	diabolo".	We	will	see	later	how	the	
mathematician	Hermann	Weyl	created	and	studied	this	object,	in	1917.		
By	the	way,	you	can	take	these	steps	with	the	"2D	diabolo",	defined	by	the	metric:		
(16)																																							
With	the	same	change	of	coordinate	you	could	check	its	regularity	by	obtaining:		
(17)																		

dr 2
Rs
r

+ r 2dϕ2

Rs > 0

ds2 =

1−

th2ρdρ2 + Rs

(
2 1+ Logchρ

  

2 1+ Logchρ
Logchρ

ds2 = Rs
  

																																																										
)2 dϕ2	

	

8	
				But	then	there	is	a	much	more	"tangible"	way	to	apprehend	this	surface.	It	is	
enough	to	imbed	it	in	a	three-dimensional	space	and	to	build	its	meridian	
 ( ϕ = cst )	.	You	then	obtain,	as	for	the	sphere,	the	differential	equation:		
(18)																																																					
Its	solution	is	the	"lying	parabola":		
(19)																																																															
This	is	the	surface:		
	

= dr 2 + dz2	
		

r = Rs +
  

dr 2
Rs
r

z2
4Rs

ds2 =

1−

  

	

Fig.3	:	The	2D	diabolo.	

					We	will	find	this	pattern	in	the	analysis	made	in	1917	by	Weyl,	which	we	will	
detail	later.		
	
				We	have	evoked	a	mode	of	representation	of	a	2-surface	by	imbedding	it	into	
our	3D	Euclidean	space.	We	make	there	a	transcendent	gesture,	by	adding	an	
additional	dimension.	But	how	a	being	living	in	a	2D	euclidean	space	would	
represent	this	diabolo?	He	could	only	conceive	it	projected	in	his	own	world.	He	
would	then	imagine	a	strange	border,	represented	by	a	circle.	The	objects	which	
go	on	this	surface,	not	Euclidean,	cross	then	a	circle	of	throat.	Our	inhabitant	of	
the	Euclidean	space	2D	can	then	imagine	that	his	mode	"has	a	place	and	a	
reverse	».		

Another	system	of	representation:	projection,	and	the	traps	of	thought.		

	

9	

Dig.4	:	Plane	representation	of	the	2D	diabolo	

					We	can	illustrate	this	relation	of	enantiomorphy	by	starting	from	an	oriented	
triangle	drawn	on	this	plane,	"habitat	of	our	2D	observer".	The	figure	below	
illustrates	this	inversion	of	the	orientation.		

	

	

Fig.5	:	Reverse	orientation.		

	

	

10	
					This	seems	obvious	to	us	because	we	have	the	possibility	of	imbedding	these	
two	structures	into	our	3D	Euclidean	representation	space.	But	for	the	inhabitant	
of	this	plane	it	would	be	very	problematic	to	consider	"that	inside	this	circle	there	
is	nothing".			
				Let's	move	on	to	the	3D	hypersurface.	Here,	we	can	no	longer	draw,	but	the	
idea	of	projection	into	a	3D	Euclidean	representation	space	is	the	same.	This	time,	
the	inhabitant	of	this	space	is	you,	it	is	me.	It	will	be	very	difficult	to	consider	
"that	inside	this	throat	sphere	there	is	nothing",	and	that	one	cannot	contract	a	
sphere	by	giving	it	an	area	lower	than	a	finite	value,	in	a	word	that	this	3D	space	
is	not	contractible.			
				Through	these	2D	and	3D	examples	we	see	that	the	fact	of	using	a	Euclidean	
space	of	representation	(the	only	mental	tool	we	have)	to	try	to	read,	to	
"understand"	(etymologically	"to	take	together")	objects	presenting	themselves	
in	the	form	of	sets	of	points	leads	us	to	imagine	objects	that,	in	fact,	do	not	exist.	
This	is	particularly	striking	for	the	3D	structure	where	we	are	totally	unable,	
mentally,	to	get	rid	of	this	idea	of	"the	inside	of	the	throat	sphere".	
				The	word	hypersurface	always	evokes	a	possible	representation	in	 a	 higher	
dimensional	representation	space.	We	have	an	intuitive	image	of	the	geodesics	of	a	
surface.	It	is	much	more	difficult	to	imagine	them	in	3D.	In	general	relativity	it	is	
often	said	that	the	space-time	is	a	hypersurface	with	four	dimensions.	Here	again,	
the	object	is	defined	by	its	metric.	What	Einstein	and	Minkowski	have	brought	is	
the	introduction	in	physics	of	hyperbolic	metrics,	whose	signature	makes	
opposite	signs	cohabit.	We	can	thus	consider	a	relativistic	space-time	with	two	
dimensions	
	(20)																																																			  ds 2 = c2dt 2 − dx2		
The	calculation	of	geodesics	corresponds	to	the	variational	problem:		
= 0		
(21)																																																										
				We	look	for	curves	corresponding	to	paths	where	the	distance	traveled	is	
minimal.	This	leads	us	to	solve	the	 Lagrange	 equations.	These	lead	us	to	
representations	of	 x	and	 t	that	are	linear	as	a	function	of	the	parameter	 s.	
Consequently	x	and	s	are	linked	by	the	linear	relation	x	=	v	s,	where	v	is	the	speed.	
And	if	we	impose	that	the	length	s	is	real,	we	must	have:		
dt < c		
(22)																																																																			
				What	do	the	theorists	do	then?	What	do	we	find	in	all	the	books,	the	courses?	
We	find	images	like	these,	in	2D	or	3D:		

Hyperbolic	surfaces	and	hypersurfaces.		

v =
 

AB∫

dx

  δ

ds

	

11	

	

	

Fig.6	:	The	light	cone.	
				On	the	left	a	way	to	represent	this	hyperbolic	space	(t,x)	in	two	dimensions.	On	
the	right	the	classical	"light	cone".	On	the	left	figure	the	red	curve	is	supposed	to	
represent	a	path	corresponding	to	x	=	v	t	with	v	<	c		
				The	black	curve	represents	a	path	with	v	>	c	.	It	is	located	in	the	"elsewhere".	
But	in	doing	so,	what	are	we	doing?	We	are	trying	to	build	a	2D	image	of	a	
hyperbolic	space	by	projecting	it	into	a	2D	Euclidean	space,	of	metric:		
(23)																																																		  ds 2 = c2dt 2 + dx2	
				We	thus	create	"something	that	does	not	exist",	in	this	case	this	greyed-out	
surface	or	volume	"outside	the	light	cone".	This	space	does	not	exist	any	more	
than	this	"interior	of	the	throat	sphere"	that	we	create	by	trying	to	project	the	
structure	of	the	3D	diabolo	into	a	3D	Euclidean	space.	This	"elsewhere"	exists,	
etymologically	speaking,	only	in	our	imagination	and	stems	from	the	image	we	
have	created.	
		The	conclusion	is	simple:		
	
					This	preamble	having	been	made,	we	will	move	on	to	the	subject	of	the	article,	
to	the	way	Hilbert	created	his	own	representation	of	space-time	and	hence	of	the	
universe.		
	

	

	
	
	
The	hectic	race,	neck	and	neck,	of	two	geniuses.		

12	
	
					In	1915	Hilbert	was	53	years	old	and	already	had	an	impressive	record	of	
achievement	behind	him,	which	had	made	him	known	far	beyond	the	German	
borders.	He	loved	abstraction	and	logic	and	was	known,	among	other	things,	for	
publishing	a	treatise	in	which	he	defined	the	axioms	underlying	Euclidean	
geometry.		All	German	and	foreign	mathematicians	consider	him	a	"beacon"	in	
the	discipline	and	know	that	his	name	will	go	down	in	the	history	of	mathematics.		
He	was	not	always	interested	in	physics.	An	amusing	anecdote	is	reported	about	
him.	When	he	was	asked	to	replace	the	mathematician	Felix	Klein,	who	every	
year	gave	a	lecture	to	the	students	of	an	engineering	school	in	Göttingen,	he	
began	his	lecture	with	these	words:		

	
-	It	is	said	that	mathematicians	and	engineers	have	difficulty	understanding	
each	other.	This	is	not	true:	they	simply	have	nothing	to	do	with	each	other.		

	

	

	
Fig.7	:	David	Hilbert	(1862-1943),	in	1915	

	

	

13	

	
Fig.8	:	Félix	Klein	(	1849-1925)	in	1915	

engineers	 to	 invent	 planes,	 submarines	 and	 torpedoes.	 We,	 scientists,	 are	
concerned	with	totally	different	things,	seeking	to	penetrate	the	secrets	of	

					It	should	be	noted	that	at	that	time	a	similar	gap	existed	in	the	field	of	
experimental	physics,	at	its	fundamental	level,	where	people	who	were	physicists	
and	chemists	were	working	on	what	would	later	be	called	nuclear	physics.	
Among	them	was	the	colorful	New	Zealand	physicist	Ernst	Rutherford.	Solicited	
during	the	First	World	War	by	politicians,	who	asked	him	if	he	could	not	produce,	
from	his	work,	some	new	weapon	that	would	allow	England	to	overtake	its	
adversary,	Germany,	he	had	answered	them,	as	he	was	laying	the	foundations	of	
the	future	nuclear	physics:		
	
-	 I	 leave	 it	 to	 your	 chemists	 to	 invent	 asphyxiating	 gases	 and	 to	 your	
matter.		
				It	was	the	meeting	with	the	young	Einstein,	twenty	years	his	junior,	that	was	
decisive	for	Hilbert.	He	then	discovered	a	fantastic	field	of	applications	of	
sophisticated	mathematics	to	physics,	which	from	then	on	was	no	less	
sophisticated.	He	established	close	relations	with	Einstein,	which	could	even	be	
described	as	friendly	and	which	were	in	any	case	based	on	a	great	mutual	esteem.	
In	June	1915	Einstein	gave	him	a	real	lecture	on	relativity	and	Hilbert	understood	
that	there	was	a	way	to	use	the	extremely	powerful	tool	represented	by	the	
techniques	of	calculus	of	variations.		
			He	began	by	applying	this	idea	to	electromagnetism,	and	then	he	became	
interested	in	gravitation.	At	the	time,	the	telephone	did	not	exist.	It	is	thus	
through	numerous	letters	that	these	two	communicate.	It	so	happens	that	a	
significant	number	of	these	correspondences	have	come	down	to	us.		They	are	
reproduced,	in	whole	or	in	part,	among	others	by	Tilman	Sauer	[3,],	who	has	
kindly	reproduced	these	texts	in	their	English	translation.	Hilbert	communicated	

	

14	
to	Einstein	his	vision	of	things:	he	thought	he	was	on	the	verge	of	unifying	the	
only	two	forces	known	at	that	time,	the	electromagnetic	force	and	gravitation.	
Einstein	worked	differently,	by	trial	and	error.	Great	mathematics	is	not	his	forte.	
Very	intuitive,	being	above	all	a	fantastic	physicist,	it	is	by	trial	and	error	that	he	
is	about	to	arrive,	after	ten	years	of	reflection,	at	what	will	be	considered	as	the	
key	to	a	new	theory,	that	of	general	relativity.	But	Hilbert	beat	him	to	the	punch	
on	November	20,	1915	[1].	It	was	only	five	days	later	that	Einstein	sent	to	the	
same	journal:	the	Annals	of	the	Prussian	Academy	of	Sciences	[4]:		

	

Fig.9	:	Albert	Einstein's	November	25,	2015	article	entitled:	
"The	Field	Equation	of	Gravitation."	[4]	
				Hereafter	is	Einstein's	equation	where	he	formulates	what	both	of	them	were	
chasing,	an	equation	whose	two	members	are	at	zero	divergence.		

	

	

	

	

	

15	

	

	

	
Fig.9	:	The	Einstein	field	equation	in	its	first	form	(25	nov.	1915).	
	Alas,	four	days	earlier	Hilbert	wrote	in	his	article	this	equation:		

Fig.10	:	The	Hilbert	field	equation	(20	nov.	1015)	[1].	

		

	

Translation	:		
	

16	

Using	the	notations	of	the	variational	derivation	with	respect	to	that	we	
introduced	above,	the	equation	of	gravitation	takes	the	form:		

⎡
⎣
																																			  

g K

⎤
⎦µν

+

∂ g L
∂gµν = 0 	

With,	as	first	member		

= g ( Kµν − 1

K gµν ) 	

⎡
⎣
																														  

g K

⎤
⎦µν

2

2

	

Rµν − 1
  

∂ g L
  

Kµν	is	the	Ricci	tensor,	which	Einstein	calls	 

∂gµν = − g Tµν	
R gµν = Tµν	
 Λ gµν	

Rµν.		 K	is	the	scalar	
				For	Hilbert	 
derived	from	it,	the	"Ricci	scalar",	which	is	designated	by	the	letter	R	in	Einstein.	
Moreover,	the:		
So	the	Hilbert	equation	is	written:		
(24)																																																					
				It	is	indeed	in	this	form,	which	lacks	the	term	attached	to	the	cosmological	
constant:	
that	Einstein	will	introduce	later,	on	Hilbert's	advice,	to	succeed	in	building	the	
first	relativistic	cosmological	model,	describing	a	stationary	universe,	that	this	
equation	will	enter	history.		
				The	equation	in	Einstein's	paper,	which	is	5	days	later	than	Hilbert's,	is	just	
another	equivalent	form,	where	we	can	recognize,	on	the	right,	"the	matter	tensor	
 Tim»	and	«	the	Laue	scalar»	 T,	which	derives	from	it	2.	But	Hilbert	adds	a	
construction	of	the	equation	by	variational	method	by	basing	it	on	an	action	built	
on	what	he	calls	a	"function	of	the	universe":	
(25)																																																												H	=	K	+	L		
																																																								
2	Built	from	the	matter	tensor,	in	the	same	way	that	the	Ricci	scalar	R	derives	
from	the	Ricci	tensor	Rim.		

	

17	
K	is	obviously	the	Ricci	scalar.	This	technique	will	be	remembered	in	history	as	
the	"Einstein-Hilbert	action".		
				In	the	course	of	their	intense	correspondence,	very	warm	relations	were	
created	between	these	two	geniuses,	who	assumed	themselves	as	such,	perfectly	
conscious	of	their	own	value,	and	that	of	their	partner.			

	

Fig.11	:	Albert	Einstein	in	1915	

					Indeed,	Einstein	and	Hilbert	were	pursuing,	at	a	time	described	as	"hectic",	two	
parallel	research	programs,	where	Einstein	focused	on	gravitation	alone,	while	
Hilbert	dreamed	of	uniting	the	two	force	fields,	electromagnetic	and	gravitational.	
In	[3]	you	can	read	about	these	days	of	agitation	and	doubt.	But	finally	Einstein	
chose	to	calm	down,	writing	to	Hilbert	on	December	20,	1915	(see	this	reference,	
page	48)		:		
			In	all	rigor	the	conclusion	should	have	been	to	attribute	this	equation	to	both	
authors.	But	at	that	time	Einstein's	steps	were	not	yet	completely	assured.	On	the	
other	hand,	Hilbert's	brilliant	career	is	a	recognized	fact.	The	elder	one,	very	
sporty,	leaves	the	premium	to	the	younger	one.		
			However,	when	we	go	back	to	these	two	equations	there	is	a	difference.	In	
Einstein's	equation	there	is	a	radical	  − g	where	the	determinant	of	the	metric	is	
preceded	by	a	minus	sign,	absent	in	Hilbert.	In	what	follows	we	will	discover	why.		

-	There	was	a	certain	resentment	between	us,	the	cause	of	which	I	do	not	
wish	 to	 analyze.	 I	 have	 fought	 against	 the	 bitterness	 associated	 with	 it,	
and	with	complete	success,	I	think	of	you	again	with	unmixed	friendship,	
and	I	wish	you	would	think	the	same	way.			

	

The	cosmos	in	1915.	

18	
	
			Before	presenting	David	Hilbert's	own	vision,	it	is	important	to	consider	what	
scientists	knew	about	the	universe	in	1915.		
			Spectroscopy	was	born	in	Germany,	in	Heidelberg,	in	1859	with	the	first	works	
of	Gustav	Kirchhoff	and	Robert	Bunsen,	inventor	of	the	gas	burner	of	the	same	
name.	It	allows	to	identify	the	nature	of	a	source	on	the	basis	of	its	spectral	
signature.	At	the	same	time,	with	the	help	of	a	telescope	installed	on	the	roof	of	
the	Vatican,	Father	Angelo	Secchi	pursued	the	idea	that	each	star	is	linked	to	a	
deceased	person.	But	in	the	United	States,	in	New	England,	at	the	same	time	the	
astronomer	Edward	Pickering	undertook	a	vast	classification	of	the	stars,	
according	to	their	spectrum,	which	will	give	birth	to	the	Hertzprung-Russel	
diagram	in	1900.		In	1865	the	Scottish	genius	James	Clerk	Maxwell	published	the	
equations	that	govern	electromagnetism.			
	

	

James	Clerk	Maxwell	1831-1879	
(died	at	48	years	old)		

			In	1916,	the	Englishman	Eddington	followed	very	closely	both	the	experimental	
and	observational	advances	and	the	progress	of	the	theory.	He	participated	
closely	in	the	movement	that	led	to	the	understanding	of	the	mechanisms	of	
energy	production	in	the	form	of	radiation	within	stars,	which	would	exploit	the	
understanding	of	radioactivity,	a	theory	that	would	only	become	functional	in	
1920.		
			Since	1840	we	know	the	velocities	of	stars	(and	beyond	their	masses),	
evaluated	by	the	effect	discovered	by	the	Austrian	Christian	Doppler	(1803-
1853)	and	the	French	Armand	Fizeau	(1819-1896).		
			Thanks	to	Newton,	celestial	mechanics	had	taken	its	bearings.	Confronted	with	
the	problem	of	the	instability	of	the	trajectories	of	the	planets,	he	believed	that,	

	

19	
from	time	to	time,	it	was	God	who,	operating	behind	the	scenes,	put	them	back	
into	their	orbits.	This	idea	was	invalidated	by	the	Frenchman	Pierre	Simon	de	
Laplace	who	solved	the	problem	using	mathematics.	Questioned	by	Bonaparte,	
who	asked	him	what	was	the	place	of	God	in	all	this,	he	replied	"that	he	did	not	
need	this	hypothesis	in	his	calculations".	In	1902,	the	Englishman	James	Jeans	
formalized	the	mechanism	of	gravitational	instability	giving	rise	to	stars	and	
planets.		
			The	first	elementary	particle	discovered	was	the	electron,	by	the	Englishman	
J.J.Thomson	in	1897,	thus	at	the	immediate	dawn	of	the	century.	The	idea	results	
from	the	interpretation	of	the	experiments	carried	out	by	the	Englishman	
Crookes	where	a	cathode	placed	in	a	vacuum	tube	projects	its	"cathodic	
radiation",	which	is	deflected	by	a	magnetic	field.	In	1995	the	Frenchman	Jean	
Perrin	identified	these	"rays"	as	a	jet	of	electrons.	Very	quickly	the	ratio	mass-
charge	and	determined	and	the	latter	is	measured	in	1911	by	the	American	
Millikan.	
	

	
Fig.12	:	J.J.Thomson	1856-1940	

				When	in	1905	the	New	Zealander	Ernst	Rutherford	demonstrated	the	
corpuscular	nature	of	matter	and	the	existence	of	atoms,	the	idea	of	atoms	made	
up	of	positively	charged	nuclei	around	which	electrons	gravitate	emerged	in	
1913.	The	first	model,	which	proposed	to	describe	the	hydrogen	atom,	had	been	
put	forward	by	the	Dane	Niels	Bohr,	who	was	then	28	years	old.		
			Thus,	during	the	first	half	of	the	19th	century,	all	the	tools,	both	theoretical	and	
observational,	were	developed.	When	Hilbert	wondered	about	the	functioning	of	
the	cosmos,	the	quantity	of	discoveries	made	in	the	few	preceding	years	was	
mind-boggling	and	contrasted	with	the	current	stagnation	of	physics,	astronomy	
and	astrophysics,	for	half	a	century,	where	no	new	particle	has	been	discovered,	
where	the	"scientists",	the	"finders"	seem	to	have	been	replaced	by	an	army	of	
"researchers",	
their	 elders,	
five	 hundred	
"accumulating	the	data".		

times	 more	 numerous	

than	

	

20	
			It	remains	that	nobody	imagines	for	a	single	second	any	evolution	of	the	cosmic	
scene,	perceived	as	globally	homogeneous	and	stationary.	The	idea	of	a	creation	
by	God,	at	an	"instant	zero",	is	imposed	in	everyone's	mind,	whether	explicitly	
formulated	or	not.		
			Let	us	add	that	the	very	beginning	of	the	discovery	of	the	deep	nature	of	the	
force	of	gravity,	reinterpreted	in	terms	of	geodesics	of	a	very	weakly	curved	
space,	does	not	change	the	global	nature	of	the	cosmos.		
			In	this	year	1915,	which	was	decidedly	rich	in	scientific	events	of	the	first	
magnitude,	we	saw	that	Einstein	had	published,	on	November	25,	1915,	a	paper	
presenting	the	equation	of	the	gravitational	field	[4].	But,	on	the	same	day,	he	
brings	a	second	important	contribution	in	the	form	of	a	first	linear	solution,	
which	gives	a	precise	evaluation	of	the	advance	of	Mercury's	perihelion	[5].	The	
linearization	is	amply	justified,	the	phenomenon,	minimal,	a	few	tens	of	seconds	
per	century,	can	be	assimilated	to	a	disturbance.	This	result	sounds	like	a	
thunderclap.	Not	only	the	approach	of	the	sky	phenomena	with	the	help	of	a	field	
equation	represents	a	major	paradigmatic	leap,	but	a	solution	of	this	same	
equation	brings	the	key	of	an	enigma	remained	until	now	without	solution.	A	
work	which	is	confirmed	a	few	weeks	later	when	the	Austrian	Karl	Schwarzschild	
[6]	,	who	writes	to	Einstein,	in	December	2015,	that	he	has	just	constructed	the	
linear	solution.		
			This	stimulated	Hilbert	who,	throughout	1916,	feverishly	prepared	the	
publication	of	an	even	more	ambitious	work,	an	extension	of	his	November	1915	
paper,	which	he	published	on	December	23,	1916,	on	Christmas	Eve.	At	the	same	
time	he	announced	to	Einstein	that	he	was	about	to	synthesize	electromagnetism	
and	gravitation,	in	short	to	create	what	can	be	considered	as	the	first	Theory	of	
Everything.		
	
Hilbert's	conception	of	the	geometry	of	space-time.		
				If	we	except	these	tiny	curvatures	linked	to	the	presence	of	masses,	space-time	
remains	almost	flat,	almost	Euclidean.	Einstein	has,	of	course,	brought	the	idea	
that	motion	alters	the	flow	of	time,	but	the	phenomenon	seems	to	manifest	itself	
in	a	sensitive	way	only	for	"relativistic"	speeds,	not	negligible	in	front	of	the	
speed	of	light,	which	do	not	yet	belong	to	the	world	of	experimental	physics	and	
in	any	case	totally	negligible	in	Nature.		In	the	following	figure,	we	can	give	
Hilbert's	representation	of	space-time.		
				Of	course,	the	general	formalism	of	relativity	shows	that	the	points	of	this	space	
can	be	located	by	an	infinite	number	of	different	coordinate	systems,	just	as	there	
is	an	infinite	number	of	ways	to	locate	the	points	on	a	sphere,	to	map	it.	But	
Hilbert	keeps	in	mind	that	there	must	be	a	particular	system,	better	than	the	
others,	that	he	calls	"true".	(Eigentliche3).	The	underlying	idea	is	that	of	a	4D	
space	layered	by	an	infinity	of	3D	hypersurfaces	stacked	on	top	of	each	other.		
3	That	which	is	most	suitable,	most	appropriate,	most	in	tune	with	reality.	

																																																								

	

21	

	

Fig.13	:	The	Hilbert	space-time,	in	its	primitive	form.		

	
				The	mass	points	obviously	follow	geodesics	of	this	time	space.	They	go	then	
according	to	"time	lines"	(Zeitlinie).	The	drawing	shows	this	family	of	time	lines,	
perpendicular	to	the	3D	hypersurfaces	representing	space.	Of	course,	if	there	
were	no	force,	the	3D	hypersurfaces	of	space	would	be	3D	Euclidean	spaces,	and	
the	trajectories	would	be	parallels,	perpendicular	to	these	parallel	folds.	And	
nothing	would	happen.	But	the	gravity	forces	result	in	a	barely	perceptible	
warping	of	the	3D	hypersurfaces.		Correlatively,	the	time	lines	deviate	slightly	
from	this	family	of	parallel	lines.	This	being	the	case,	we	remain	very	close	to	a	
Euclidean	structure.	Hilbert	therefore	starts	by	introducing	four	coordinates	
  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 )	which	he	designates	as	"universal	parameters"	(Weltparameter).		
The	first	three	coordinates	refer	to	space,	while	 w4	refers	to	time.	The	instant		
w4	=	0	represents,	even	if	Hilbert	does	not	formulate	it	explicitly,	"the	instant	of	
the	creation	of	the	world	by	God"	(Hilbert	comes	from	a	protestant	family,	deeply	
religious).		
				For	Hilbert,	time	is	of	a	different	essence	than	space.	The	elegant	way	to	
account	for	this	is	to	imagine	that	the	coordinate	of	time	is	purely	imaginary,	
which	he	does	by	writing,	on	the	first	page	of	his	paper	:		
	(26)																											  w1 = x1

w4 = ix4	

w2 = x2

w3 = x3

	

22	
				Before	talking	about	length,	as	a	good	mathematician,	Hilbert	considers	a	
bilinear	form	G	constructed	from	the	coordinates	  ( X1, X 2 , X3 , X 4 )	of	a	vector	of	
this	four-dimensional	space	:		
																																											
He	does	not	specify	his	choice	concerning	this	form	until	six	pages	later:	
	

G( X1, X 2 , X3 , X 4 ) =
  

X ν			

gµν Xµ

∑

µν

	

	

Fig.14	:	The	bilinear	form	preferred	by	Hilbert,		
expressed	in	a	Gaussian	coordinate	system.	
	This	expression	can	then	be	expressed	in	its	differential	form:		
(28)																																					
dxν			
				Hilbert	then	considers	a	curve	whose	points	are	marked	with	a	parameter	p	:		
( s = 1, 2 , 3, 4 )	
(29)																																		  xs = xs( p)
					It	specifies	well	that	these	coordinates	the	  xs( p)		are	real.	He	then	divides	his	
curve	into	portions	and	considers	the	expression	:		
)	
(30)																																															

G( dx1, dx2 , dx3 , dx4 ) =
  

gµν dxµ

∑

µν

,

,

,

dx1
dp

dx2
dp

dx3
dp

dx4
dp

G(
  

	

23	

∫

	

G(

λ =

) dp

dxs
dp

dxs
dp

dxs
dp

G(
  

G(
  

) < 0	

) > 0	

He	then	considers	two	cases.		
Either	the	bilinear	form,	in	the	region	where	this	curve	is	spanned,	is	positive:	
(31)																																																										
				He	then	decided	to	call	these	portions	of	the	curve	segments	(Strecke).	He	then	
introduced	a	first	"length	of	this	segment",	according	to:		
(32)																																																  
Then	he	considers	another	portion	that	he	decides	to	call	a	timeline	(Zeitlinie)	
where	:		
(33)																																																										
and	the	integral	calculated	along	this	other	portion	of	the	curve	will	be	called	the	
proper	time	of	this	timelike	curve:		
(34)																																																										
	
Finally	it	introduces	curves	of	zero	length	(Nullinie),	such	as:		
(35)																																																																	
				Thanks	to	the	expression	(34)	Hilbert	manages	to	establish	a	link	with	
Einstein's	relativity.	Indeed	its	bilinear	form,	in	its	differential	form,	is:		
(36)																																											  G( dxs ) = dx1
				It	is	therefore	negative	if	we	want	to	fit	with	the	requirements	of	relativity,	with	
a	speed	of	light	c	=	1	:		
(37)																																											
				Thanks	to	the	introduction	of	the	minus	sign	under	the	root,	Hilbert	finds	the	
proper	time	of	special	relativity:		
(38)																																								  dτ2 = dx4

) = 0.	

< 1	

2 + dx2
dx4

v2 =
  

2 − dx2

2 + dx2

2 − dx4

2	

2 − dx3

2 + dx3

2 − dx1

2 + dx3

2	

τ =
  

G(
  

dxs
dp

dxs
dp

− G(

) dp

dx1

∫

2

2

24	
				But	now	you	have	the	origin	of	the	 change	 of	 signature,	which	has	imposed	
itself	as	a	standard	today,	in	cosmology	as	well	as	in	theoretical	physics,	without	
finding	a	trace	of	an	article	that	justifies	it.		
				In	the	expression	(37)	we	find	the	signature	introduced	by	Einstein	which	is	
 ( + − − − ).	In	what	Hilbert	writes	it	has	become	 ( + + + − )	or	 ( − + + + )	and	the	
signs	were	reversed.		
				In	these	first	pages	of	his	article	of	1916	we	find	something	much	more	serious,	
which	will	weigh	on	all	the	later	development	of	cosmology,	which	is	this	idea	of	
endowing	its	four-dimensional	variety	M4	,	not	with	one	length,	but	with	two,		 λ
and	 τ	!	He	thus	speaks	of	two	different	measuring	instruments.	The	length	will	be	
measured	with	a	"light	clock"	(Lichtuhr).	In	other	regions	of	his	space-time,	
where	his	G-form	is	positive,	he	will	use	a	tape	(Maβfaden	)	to	measure	his	length
λ	.		But	he	points	out	that	if	you	try	to	measure	in	one	region	with	the	instrument	
used	in	the	other,	it	does	not	work.	One	obtains	indeed	then	imaginary	values.		
				He	will	not	say	more,	in	the	rest	of	the	article,	about	the	nature	of	these	
mysterious	regions	of	his	space-time	where	the	lengths	are	measured	with	this	
scalar.	And	this	while	he	concentrates	with	great	insistence	on	what	can	have,	
according	to	him,	a	physical	meaning	(Physicalischer	Natur).		
			A	little	further	on,	Hilbert	defines	the	light	cone	(Null-kegel:	the	null	cone)	
which	is	in	   as = ( x1, x2 , x3 , x4 )	(its	vertex)	and	whose	current	point	has	
coordinates	  ( X1, X 2 , X3 , X 4 )	satisfying	the	equation:		
	(39)																																		  G( X1 − x1, X 2 − x2 , X3 − x3 , X 4 − x4 ) = 0	
			And	he	specifies	that	all	the	time	lines	(timelike	curves)	resulting	from	the	point	
 as	are	located	inside	this	four-dimensional	part	of	the	world	whose	border	is	the	
temporal	separation	of	 as.		
All	time	lines	(time-like	curves)	from	the	point	 as	are	located	inside	this	four-
dimensional	part	of	the	world	whose	border	is	the	temporal	separation	of	 as.	He	
then	focuses	on	the	problem	of	 causality	in	physics,	looking	for	a	"true"	
coordinate	system.		
On	this	subject	he	states	:		

-	 A	 space-time	 coordinate	 system	 is	 called	 "true"	 (Eigentliches	 Raum-
Zeitkoordinatensystem)	 if	 it	 is	 a	 system	 for	 which	 the	 following	 four	
inequalities	are	satisfied,	with	the	additional	condition	that	the	determinant	
is	negative.	

	

			

	
(40)	

25	

dx4

	
				He	then	adopts	the	definition	of	a	system	of	a	change	of	space-time	coordinates	
also	called	"true",	"real"	(eigentliches).	It	is	simply	the	system	of	coordinate	
changes	which,	to	"true"	coordinates,	satisfying	the	inequalities	(40),	makes	
another	system	correspond,	endowed	with	the	same	properties.	The	four	
inequalities	mean	that	at	any	point	event	as	the	associated	null	cone	excludes	the	
line	 through	 the	 point	
linear	 space	 x4	 =	 a4	 but	 contains	
inside	 the	
  ( x1 = a1 , x2 = a2 , x3 = a3 , x4 = a4 ).		
				He	then	considers	a	line	of	universe	xs	=	xs(p).	From		(33)	it	follows	that	in	a	
"true"	space-time	coordinate	system	we	must	have	:	
dp ≠0	
(41)																																																																		  
								He	deduces	that	along	this	time	line,	the	"true"	time	coordinate	x4	must	be	
systematically	increasing	and	cannot	decrease.	Because	a	time	line	remains	a	
timeline	under	any	transformation	of	the	coordinates,	two	point	events	located	
on	the	same	time	line	can	never	correspond	to	the	same	value	 x4	of	the	time	
coordinate,	through	a	"true"	space-time	transformation.	This	means	that	these	
two	events	cannot	be	simultaneous.		
				We	thus	see	that	the	cause	and	effect	relations	underlying	the	principle	of	
causality	(Kausalitätsprinzips),	do	not	lead	to	internal	contradictions	in	this	new	
physics,	if	we	take	into	account	the	inequalities	(31)	as	part	of	our	basic	
equations,	which	leads	us	to	confine	ourselves	in	"true"	space-time	coordinates.		
			Hilbert	now	introduces	the	important	point	of	his	presentation:	the	use	of	
coordinates	that	he	decides	to	call	Gaussian,	because	they	represent	a	
generalization	of	the	polar	coordinate	system	used	by	Gauss	in	his	theory	of	
surfaces.	Figure	(13)	illustrates	the	concept,	which	is	a	foliation,	where	these	
surfaces	correspond	to	a	constant	value	of	x4.	The	family	of	orthogonal	curves	are	
geodesics	along	which	this	coordinate	runs.	If	we	opt	for	a	coordinate	system	
where	  
g44 = − 1	then	the	 x4	coordinate	is	identified	with	the	 proper	 time	.	The	
Gaussian	coordinates	then	satisfy	the	relation	(32)	and	correspond	to:	
(42)																															 
g44 = −1	4	
			Mais,	à	ce	stade,	le	choix	de	Hilbert	reste	arbitraire.	Il	avoue	échouer	à	le	faire	
émerger	sur	la	base	de	considérations	purement	mathématiques.		
																																																								
g44 = 0	
4	In	the	translation	published	by	Springer	an	error	has	crept	in.	We	find	 

g24 = 0,

g34 = 0,

g14 = 0,

	

	

2 + g11 dx1

2 − g11 dx1

2 + g22 dx2

2 − g22 dx2

2 + g44 dx33

2 − g44 dx33

G(dxs) = g44 dx4

G(dxs) = − g44 dx4

How	Hilbert	justifies	his	choice.		

2		
2		

26	
				When	a	Riemann	space	is	put	in	its	diagonalized	form	(absence	of	crossed	
terms)	the	sequence	of	signs	attached	to	the	different	terms	represents	its	
signature.		It	is	an	invariant	by	change	of	coordinates	(real).	Thus	the	Einstein	
space-time	corresponds	to	the	bilinear	form:		
(43)																								  
and	his	signature	is	 ( + − − − ).	In	contrast,	in	his	vision	of	space-time	the	form	
retained	by	Hilbert	is		:		
(45)																								  
and	his	signature	is			 ( − + + + ).	Einstein's	choice	is	based	on	the	identification	of	
the	fourth	coordinate	through	  x4 = ct	.	Thus,	the	simple	fact	of	imposing	that	the	
shape	is	positive	translates	this	physical	property	which	is	the	limitation	of	the	
speed	to	the	speed	 c,	that	of	light	(corresponding	to	a	zero	value	of	the	line	
element).		The	proper	time	is	then	calculated	by	:	
dp		
	(46)																																																				
Hilbert's	choice	is	less	clear	and	forces	him	to	situate	the	real,	time-like	
trajectories,	in	a	representation	such	that	G	<	0.	He	must	then	introduce	a	change	
of	sign,	and	opt	for	the	relatio:		
(47)																																																				
				To	this	we	can	add	the	idea,	singular,	of	endowing	space	with	a	second	
measurement	tool,	giving	a	length,	whose	physical	nature	is	not	even	touched	
upon	in	the	article,	nor	in	the	following	ones,	and	which	will	give	birth	to	the	
myth	of	"spacelike	curves".		
It	is	then	necessary	to	understand	why	Hilbert	made	this	choice.		
	
				For	Einstein,	this	fourth	coordinate	is	"of	the	same	nature"	as	the	other	three.	
Let's	take	our	familiar	three-dimensional	Euclidean	space.	On	the	surface	of	the	
Earth	we	will	speak	for	example	of	the	"length	x",	"width	y"	and	"height	z"	of	an	
object,	knowing	that	these	denominations	are	arbitrary.	We	can	make	an	element	
of	the	group	of	rotations	act	on	this	object	by	totally	modifying	this	scheme,	while	
we	do	not	alter	the	object	itself.	The	distances	between	its	different	points	remain	
unchanged.	These	rotations	are	part	of	the	isometry	group	of	this	3D	Euclidean	

The	explanation	of	the	choice	of	an	inverted	signature	by	Hilbert.		

dp	

τ =
  

τ =
  

dxs
dp

dxs
dp

− G(

G(

∫

∫

)

)

	

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

G =

		

1
0
0 −1
0
0
0
0

27	
space.	Instead	of	rotating	the	object	we	can	decide	to	observe	it	from	a	different	
angle.		
				The	objects	of	the	space-time	are	movements,	characterized	by	the	energy	 E	
and	the	impulse	 p	which	are	associated	to	them	5.	The	isometry	group	of	
Minkowski	space,	the	Poincaré	group,	has	a	subgroup,	the	Lorentz	group,	which	
happens	to	be	the	equivalent	of	the	group	of	rotations	and	symmetries,	in	the	
Euclid	group.		The	latter	operates	rotations	and	symmetries	that	preserve	lengths	
(isometry:	same	length).	The	Lorentz	group	"operates	rotations	in	four	
dimensions"	and	preserves	a	length,	that	of	the	impulse-energy	quadrivector.		
				These	who	see	things	in	this	way,	through	this	"group-view"	are	then	tempted	
to	imagine	that	this	 x4	dimension	is	real	and	is	measured	in	...	meters.	What	
creates	these	"hyperbolic	rotations"	then	comes	from	the	axiomatic	construction	
of	the	Lorentz	group:		
(48)								 LT G L = G					with	the	Gramm	matrix					
				This	aspect	is	present	in	Einstein's	thought,	but	not	in	Hilbert's,	who	is	
immediately	attached	to	the	reassuring	Gaussian	coordinates.	Certainly,	the	mass	
points	do	not	remain	immobile.	But	in	a	world	which	remains	very	far	from	
relativistic	physics,	we	are	very	close	to	the	Euclidean	vision	evoked	in	figure	13.	
So	what	is	real	for	Hilbert	are	the	space	coordinates			:	
			These	are	tangible	for	him.	Time	is	another	matter.	Nobody	can	take	a	second	
between	thumb	and	forefinger.	So,	Hilbert	concludes,	this	one	must	be	of	another	
nature,	imaginary.	Finally,	another	point,	the	universe	has	a	beginning,	in			x4	=	0.		
Hilbert	is	protestant.	One	can	imagine	him	paraphrasing	Genesis:		
-  God	 first	 created	 a	 four-dimensional	 space	 whose	 points	 were	
																																																			  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 )	
	
				Before	the	play	began,	the	author	had	to	set	the	stage	before	the	curtain	rose.		
All	the	objects	were	put	in	their	place,	the	stars	and	their	procession	of	planets,	
ready	to	launch	themselves	into	their	orbits.		The	distances	that	separated	them	
being	predefined	and	real.		
																																																								
5	The	mathematician	J.M.Souriau	added	the	spin,	as	an	object	of	pure	geometry.	

  ( x1, x2 , x3 )	

marked	by	the	coordinates		

0
0
0
−1

0
0
−1
0

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

 

	

28	

-	 Then	 God	 decided	 that	 the	 fourth	 coordinate	 should	 be	 purely	
imaginary,	according	to	  w4 = i x4 	and	that	was	the	first	day,	the	first	
moment.	 	 The	 Earth	 then	 began	 its	 movement	 around	 the	 Sun,	 the	
same	 as	 the	 other	 stars	 of	 the	 cosmos.	 Time	 appeared,	 irreversible	
and	implacable.		

			We	read	this	interpretation	of	Hilbert's	thought	through	these	lines	of	his	article.	
Let	us	quote	him:		

Due	 to	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 three-dimensional	 space	 in	 x4	 =	 0	 ,	 as	 we	 have	
posed	it	a	priori	(Vorausgesestzen:	"posed	first,	before")	the	quadratic	form	
of	the	variables	X1	,		X2	,		X2		described	by	the	right-hand	side	of	(see	Figure	
14)	is	necessarily	positive	and	defined.	

					Therefore	the	first	three	inequalities	(40	in	this	paper)	are	satisfied,	as	
well	as	the	fourth,	and	the	Gaussian	coordinate	system	appears	to	be	the	
true	(eigentliches:	proper)	coordinate	system	of	spacetime.		

			What	creates	events?	Hilbert	takes	up	the	idea	launched	a	century	earlier	by	
Laplace.	He	writes:		

  qs

gµν

-	 If	 in	 the	 present	 time	 we	 have	 the	 data	 concerning	 the	 physical	
quantities	 and	 their	 first	 derivatives	 with	 respect	 to	 time,	 their	 future	
values	can	always	be	determined:	the	laws	of	physics,	and	this	without	
exception,	 the	 laws	 of	 physics,	 have	 been	 expressed	 to	 date	 through	 a	
system	 of	 differential	 equations	 in	 which	 the	 number	 of	 unknown	
functions	is	equal	to	the	number	of	these	equations.		

			Hilbert	lists	these	data.	These	are	the	ten	potentials	  
(µ,ν = 1,2,3)	which	
emerge	from	the	symmetrical	tensor	of	format	(4,4),	representing	the	matter.	To	
this	 we	 must	 add,	 at	 any	 point,	 the	 components	 of	 the	 quadrivector	
(s = 1,2,3,4)of	electromagnetism.	This	makes	a	total	of	fourteen	potentials.	
But,	when	counting	the	equations,	including	those	found	in	1840	by	the	genius	
Maxwell,	Hilbert	counts	only	ten,	independent	of	each	other.		
				Under	such	conditions,	as	is	the	case	in	this	new	physics	of	general	relativity,	he	
concludes	that	it	is	not	possible,	from	the	knowledge	of	physical	quantities	at	the	
present	moment,	to	determine	future	values	in	a	unique	way.	Faced	with	this	
impossibility	of	anchoring	a	logic	of	physics	on	a	causality	based	on	concrete	
elements,	Hilbert	falls	back	on	the	opinion	that	"to	follow	the	essence	of	this	new	
of	physics	that	has	a	physical	meaning".		And	he	adds	"In	physics,	we	must	consider	
physical	meaning".	And,	without	any	real	mathematical	argumentation,	since	he	
adds	"it	is	not	mathematical	problems	that	are	important	to	discuss	here".	And	he	

principle	of	relativity	one	must	require	the	invariance,	separately,	of	each	postulate	

everything	that	is	not	invariant	by	change	of	the	system	of	coordinates,	as	devoid	of	

	

		

(µ ≠ ν)

g11 = 1,

g33 = 1,

g22 = 1,

g44 = −1

gµν = 0
  

29	
concludes:	("Instead	I	will	limit	myself	to	formulate	considerations	concerning	this	
particular	problem")6.		He	concludes	that	his	choice;		
	(49)																								
presents	itself,	for	him,	as	the	only	alternative	representing	"the	only	regular	
solution	of	the	basic	equations	of	physics",	and	that	it	represents,	according	to	
him,	"a	 solution,	 and	 even	 the	 only	 regular	 solution	 of	 the	 basic	 equations	 of	
physics".			
	
Conclusion	on	this	first	part	of	Hilbert's	1916	article.		
				After	the	Second	World	War,	at	the	turn	of	the	seventies,	a	change	of	signature	
was	de	facto	ratified,	through	the	scientific	publications	that	followed,	without	an	
article	published	in	a	physics	journal	justifying	the	reason.	In	the	same	way	these	
chimeras,	like	"the	light	cone",	"outside	of	which"	is	a	part	of	space	qualified	as	
"elsewhere",	populated	with	"spacelike	curves",	appeared,	whereas	this	vision	
comes	from	the	projection	of	a	reality	associated	with	a	hyperbolic	geometry,	in	a	
space	of	representation	endowed	with	an	elliptical	geometry,	an	act	of	which	we	
have	shown	that	it	generated	objects	exempt	from	reality.		
				We	had	to	go	back	to	Hilbert's	1916	paper	to	trace	the	source	of	these	drifts.	In	
fact,	a	"standard"	vision	of	cosmology,	populated	by	presentations	that	were	
considered	as	acquired,	not	contestable,	was	built	on	the	basis	of	later	texts,	
written	in	English,	and	therefore	more	easily	assimilated	in	this	language	that	
had	become	commonplace	on	a	planetary	scale	after	the	war.	The	authors,	like	
medieval	copyists,	copied	one	another	without	any	being	able	to	return	to	the	
fundamental	texts	if	they	did	not	master	German.		
				To	this	we	must	add	that	if	they	had	simply	made	the	effort	to	go	back	to	the	
original	version,	by	simply	looking	at	equation	(14)	of	this	article	they	would	
have	been	able	to	see	immediately	that	their	interpretation	was	in	total	
contradiction	with	the	result	of	Schwarzschild.		
			It	is	significant	that	Hilbert's	articles	of	1915-1916	were	only	translated	into	
English	in	2007	([1],	[2]),	i.e.	ninety	years	after	they	were	published.	Worse	still,	
these	translations	remain	today,	like	many	others,	under	copyright,	as	part	of	a	
work	gathering	elements	of	this	kind	made	available	to	scientists	for	a	price	
(October	2021)	of	733	dollars	for	the	printed	version	and	608	dollars	for	the	
6	In	the	English	translation	by	Springer,	2007,	we	read			:	«	is	a	mathematical	
problem	not	to	be	discussed	here.	Instead	I	confine	myself	to	presenting	thoughts	
concerning	this	problem	in	particular	».	Le	texte	allemand	est	:	«sind	ist	
mathematisch	hier	nicht	allgemein	zu	erörternde	aufgade.	Ich	beschränke	mich		
vielmehr	darauf,	einige	besondere	diese	Aufgabe	betreffende	überlegungen	
anzustellen	».	

																																																								

	

30	
digital	version!	We	had	to	pay	58	dollars	to	buy	the	two	pdf's	corresponding	to	
the	two	articles	that	serve	as	a	basis	for	this	paper,	while	they	are	working	tools	
for	researchers.	If	readers	want	to	consult	these	translations,	they	will	have	to	
pay	the	same	amount.		Today,	there	are	no	scientists,	presenting	themselves	as	
experts	in	cosmology,	who	have	read	the	fundamental	texts,	or	even	know	of	the	
existence	of	a	mass	of	capital	texts,	some	of	which	have	not	yet	been	translated	
from	German.		
				In	what	follows	we	will	highlight	a	glaring	and	indisputable	error	of	David	
Hilbert,	the	immense	impact	of	which	will	be	measured	in	all	the	development	of	
cosmology	that	followed.		
				This	error	was	first	identified	by	the	Canadian	L.S.	Abrams	[7]	in	1989,	after	
examining	the	original	text,	published	in	German	by	Karl	Schwarzschild	in	
January	1916	[6],	and	comparing	it	with	Hilbert's	article	of	December	1916,	also	
in	German.		
				In	1999	a	similar	approach	was	taken	by	A.Loinger	[8],	always	starting	from	
German	texts,	which	he	reads	fluently.		
				En	1999	l'italien	S.Antoci,	et	l'allemand	D.E	Liebscher	reprennent	cette	
question	[9]	et	installent	sur	arXiv	les	traductions	faites	par	Liebscher,	enfin	
disponibles	en	langue	anglaise,	83	ans	après	leur	publication	en	allemand,	alors	
que	ces	textes	sont	considérés	comme	la	base	même	de	la	théorie	des	trous	noirs.			
			En	2001	ils	montrent	que	l'erreur	relève	d'une	mauvaise	compréhension	de	la	
topologie	de	la	solution	trouvée	par	Schwarzschild	[10]	.	
			En	2003	S.Antoci	réitère	en	publiant	un	article	très	documenté	:	David	Hilbert	
and	the	origin	of	the	Schwarzschild	Solution	[11].		
Plus	récemment,	en	2021,	le	Russe	Anatoli	Vankov	souligne	ce	point	en	concluant	
"Strictly	talking	the	Black	hole	does	not	come	from	the	general	relativity	theory"	
[12].	
	
				Let's	go	back	to	the	chronology.	On	November	20,	1916	Hilbert	published	his	
first	paper	entitled	"Foundations	of	Physics"	[1].	Five	days	later	Einstein	
published	his	own	version	of	the	field	equation	[4]	as	well	as	the	first	solution	of	
the	linearized	version	of	the	equation,	providing	the	first	explanation	of	the	
advance	of	Mercury's	perihelion	[5].	On	December	22,	1915	the	mathematician	
Karl	Schwarzschild,	who	avidly	follows	everything	published	in	the	section	of	the	
Prussian	 Academy's	 annals	 devoted	 to	 mathematics,	 writes	 to	 Einstein	
announcing	that	he	has	just	constructed	the	non-linear	solution	of	his	equation,	
which	confirms	his	calculation.	He	announces	to	him	that	he	will	publish	an	
article	in	the	same	review.	The	text	of	this	letter	is	available	at	the	reference	[3].:		

Hilbert's	error.		

	

31	

	

Fig.14	:	Schwarzschild's	letter	to	Einstein	of	December	22,	1916	

  R , θ , ϕ 	are	not	the	coordinates	"in	use	7	»,	but	it	turns	out	that	this	
is	the	best	way	to	express	the	metric.		

	Translation	of	the	underlined	passage:		
				We	see	that	the	genuine	radial	variable	r	is	clearly	visible.	Schwarzschild	
introduces	an	"intermediate	variable"	(Hilfsgröβe)	R	,	according	to	the	relation:		
)1/3	,	
that	Hilbert	will	confuse	with	a	radial	variable.		
				In	his	defense,	we	can	say	that	in	1916	the	mathematical	tool	"differential	
geometry"	was	not	completely	mastered.	In	order	to	point	out	the	error	with	
precision,	we	will	resume	Hilbert's	calculation,	point	by	point.		
				He	begins	by	listing	the	hypotheses	which	are	at	the	basis	of	this	solution,	
which	he	chooses	to	describe	using	what	is	for	him	a	touchstone,	Gaussian	
coordinates,	with:		
	
(50)																																					  
			The	metric	potentials	are	independent	of	time	 x4	.	To	this	he	adds	that	they	
present	a	central	symmetry	(zentrisch	symmeytisch),	with	respect	to	the	origin	of	
																																																								
7	Erlauten	:	authorized,	permitted,	standard,	in	use.	

R= r 3 + α3
  

g24 = 0,

g34 = 0,

g14 = 0,

(

	

32	
the	coordinates.	An	origin	that	he	assimilated	to	the	value	R	=	0	and	not	r	=	0.	In	a	
more	modern	way	one	would	speak	of	an	invariance	under	the	action	of	the	
group	SO(3)	and	even	O(3).	Indeed,	a	geometric	object	which	has	this	property	
does	not	automatically	have	a	"center".	A	torus	has	an	"axial"	symmetry,	but	this	
axis	only	appears	when	we	plunge	it	into		  !3	.	Formally,	this	axis	does	not	exist.	
Similarly,	returning	to	the	metric	of	the	"3D	diabolo",	this	object	does	not	have	a	
"central	symmetry",	because	this	"center"	only	appears	when	we	project	it	into	a	
representation	space	which	is	the	three-dimensional	Euclidean	space.	It	is	
invariant	by	action	of	the	group	O(3).			
Hilbert	then	writes:		
(51)	

In	agreement	with	Schwarzschild,	if	we	pose:		

	

w1 = r cosϑ
w2 = r sinϑ cosϕ
w3 = r sinϑsinϕ
w4 = l
  

.		

dp
dp
 

dt
dp
 

	mais	la	dérivée		

				We	find	a	character	l	which	translates	the	vision	that	Hilbert	has	of	the	universe.	
These	are	four	coordinates	which	are,	let	us	refer	to	the	beginning	of	his	article,	
universal	parameters	(weltparameter)	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 )	.	What	is	extraordinary	is	
that	Hilbert	will	conduct	his	calculation	in	this	coordinate	system.	The	time	t	will	
appear	only	at	the	very	end	"when	all	the	cosmic	mechanics	will	start	working".			
In	the	Lagrange	equations,	which	will	follow,	he	does	not	manipulate	the	
derivative	
This	is	a	way	for	him	to	affirm	that	this	metric	"exists",	that	this	geometry	"pre-
exists"	before	God	decides	that	l	=	it,	before	starting	the	time	race.	For	Hilbert	the	
solar	system	exists,	as	it	is,	since	the	creation	of	the	universe	by	God,	since	time	
zero.			
			Another	remark,	in	this	following	you	will	find	  g	and	not	  − g	.	So	the	
determinant	of	the	metric	is	positive.	We	have	to	remember	that	for	Hilbert	the	
curvature	phenomena	are	exceptional	accidents,	almost	imperceptible	folds	in	a	
practically	Euclidean	universe.	The	universe	associated	to	these	coordinates	
  ( w1, w2 , w3, w4 )	is	therefore	Euclidean.	Does	it	have	a	length?	No,	not	yet.	It	is	
only	when	this	length	(these	lengths	in	the	plural,	if	we	stick	to	Hilbert's	text,	
which	defines	two	of	them)	that	the	space	becomes	pseudo-Euclidean	and	that	
the	determinant	becomes	negative.	Before	God	gives	it	a	physical	character,	it	is	
an	object	of	pure	mathematics.	We	could	call	it	"metaphysical"..		
	

	

in	 a	

33	
->	When	Einstein	produced	his	field	equation,	he	created	a	tool	with	which	
to	interpret	physical	phenomena,	accessible	to	astronomy.	He	is	thus	
four-dimensional	 world	   ( x1, x2 , x3 , t ) ,	 concret.	 The	
already	
determinant	of	its	metric	is	therefore	negative	and	it	must	handle	a	  − g.		
->	When	Hilbert	produces	his	own	version	of	the	field	equation	he	is	in	
another	universe,	which	he	wants	to	be	more	abstract,	more	fundamental,	
the	universe	of	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 ).	You	now	have	an	explanation	for	the	
presence	of	the	  g	in	its	field	equation,	constructed	and	written	in	the	
system	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 ).		
					It	is	extremely	regrettable	that	I	cannot	provide	a	link	to	the	English	translation	
of	Hilbert's	1915	article	[1],	which	is	still	under	this	scandalous	copyright,	even	
though	it	is	a	key	element	of	the	world's	scientific	culture.	So	it	will	cost	you	29	
dollars	if	you	want	to	check	that	the	coordinates	  ( x1, x2 , x3 , x4 )	are	totally	absent	
.	This	is	true	for	all	terms,	the	
from	this	article	where	all	derivatives	are	in	
Christoffels	coefficients,	the	terms	of	the	Ricci	tensor.		
										So	the	Hilbert	field	equation	refers	to	a	space	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 )	
				End	of	this	digression.	In	his	1916	paper	Hilbert	puts	the	bilinear	form	in	the	
form		:		
(52)																												  F(r)dr 2 + G(r)( dϑ2 + sin2ϑ dϕ2 ) + H(r) dl 2	
A	further	step	has	been	taken.	Hilbert	is	then	in	a	reference	frame:		
(53)																																		   w1 = x1, w2 = x2 , w3 = x3 , w4 =l1
}		
			The	passage	in	polar	coordinates	implies	that	its	variable	r	is	defined,	as	with	
Schwarzschild	[10]8;		by	:		
2 ≥ 0		
(54)																																																		  r =
			Then,	thanks	to	the	change	of	variable,	implicit,	it	is	passed	in	polar	coordinates:		
ϕ = arccos x1		
(54)																																					  ϑ = arcsin x3
				We	are	thus	in	the	coordinates	(51).	From	(52)	it	is	clear	that	Hilbert	expresses	
his	bilinear	form	in	the	system:		
(55)																																																						  ( r , ϑ, ϕ, l )	
																																																								
8	What	you	can	check	in	the	English	translation,	not	covered	by	a	copyright	

∂
∂ws
 

x1
2 + x2

2 + x3

{

34	

				Other	form	of	the	system	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 ).		
There	is	no	question	of	time.		
He	then	poses	:		
(56)																																																										  r * = G(r)		
			It	is	then	that	he	will	commit	a	major	error,	reported	since	1989	in		
([7],	[8],	[9],	[10],	[11],	[12])	.		
He	writes:		

	

	

	

Fig.15	:	Hilbert's	error	

	Translation	:		-	We	are	therefore,	in	the	same	way,	entitled	to	interpret	  ( r*, ϑ, ϕ, l )	
as	polar	spatial	coordinates.	If	we	introduce	 r	instead	of	 r*	in	(our	
expression	of	the	bilinear	form)	and	omit	the	*	sign	again,	we	obtain	
the	expression:		
(57)																													  M(r)dr 2 + r 2( dϑ2 + sin2ϑ dϕ2 ) + W (r)dl 2		
				This	bilinear	form	is	a	solution	of	the	Einstein	field	equation	without	a	second	
member	which	then	reduces	to	canceling	the	components	of	the	Ricci	tensor,	
which	Hilbert	denotes	by	 
Kµν	.	These	are	calculated	on	the	basis	of	Christoffels	
symbols.	Note	that	Hilbert,	as	in	his	1915	paper,	does	all	his	calculations	with	the	

	

35	
variables	   ( r , ϑ, ϕ, l )	i.e.	"universal"-	coordinates	»	   ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 )	.	
	His	
calculation	of	the	geodesics	is	then	based	on	the	variation	of	the	action,	
constructed	with	these	same	variables		:		
	
dp = 0	
(58)											
	
Hs	corresponding	Lagrange	equations	are:	
(59)	

δ M dr
∫
dp
  

+ W dl
dp

+r 2 dϑ
dp

+ r 2sin2ϑ

dϕ
dp

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

⎞
⎠⎟

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞
⎠⎟

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞
⎠⎟

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞
⎠⎟

⎛
⎝⎜

2

2

2

2

	

	The	type	'	in	these	equations,	and	in	what	follows,	refers	to	a	derivation	with	
respect	to	r.		The	differential	equations	of	the	geodesic	curves	are:	
	
(60)																																						
dp = 0	
	We	notice	that	we	are	always	in	these	"universal"	coordinates	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 ).	
Hilbert	then	computes	non-zero	Christofells	symbols:		
(61)																																																	

d 2ws
dp2 +
  

dwµ
dp

dwν

∑

⎧
⎨
⎩

⎫
⎬
⎭

µν

µ

s

ν

	

	

	This	allows	him	to	calculate	the	components	of	the	Ricci	tensor	9		
(62)	

36	

	
The	calculation	of	the	Ricci	scalar	follows:	
9	In	the	English	translation,	under	copyright,	a	sign	error	in	the	equation	
giving	K22	where	the	translator	has	put	a	plus	sign	instead	of	a	minus	sign	in	
the	second	term	of	the	right	member.		

																																																								

	

	(63)	

37	

	

	

r

	

M =

r - m

			

W = w 2 r - m
r 

				Hilbert	places	himself	in	a	coordinate	system	where	the	determinant	is	positive,	
which	allows	him	to	write:		
(64)																																																						   g = M W r 2sinϑ		
Then	:	
(65)		
He	poses	
(64)																																							  
			->		The	letter	w	does	not	designate	the	modulus	of	the	vector	  ( w1, w2 , w3 , w4 )	
				It	is	an	unknown	function.	By	making	the	change	(64)	Hilbert	will	now	have	
two	unknown	functions	to	determine:	m	and	w	.	Why	such	a	change?	It	is	inspired	
by	the	equation	in	Schwarzschild's	paper	and	these	functions	m	and	w	will	turn	
out	to	be	simple	constants.		
			But,	in	passing,	we	discover	the	origin	of	lette	m	used	to	describe	what	has	the	
dimension	of	a	length!		
It	comes	from:		
(65)	
				Hilbert	constructed	his	action	on	the	basis	of	a	function	H	=	K	+	L	,	where	K	is	
the	Ricci	scalar.	But	in	a	portion	of	the	universe	which	is	empty,	L	=	0	.	So	the	
variation	reduces	to:		
	(66)																																																				  δ

	
dr dϑ dϕ dl = 0		

K g

∫∫

∫∫

	

∫

38	
  ( r , ϑ, ϕ, l ).	These	geodesics	
				Note	that	we	are	still	in	the	coordinate	system	
"exist",	but	"as	God	has	not	yet	created	time",	the	planets	cannot	launch	
themselves	on	these	geodesic-orbits.	This	equation	is	equivalent	to:		
dr = 0	
(67)																																																																	  δ wm'
And	the	Lagrange	equations	then	give:		
		
(68)																																																																							
The	solution	constructed	by	David	Hilbert	is	then	written:		
(69)																					
dl 2	
And,	posing		l	=	i	t		(i.e.	w4	=	i	x4	,	according	to	Hilbert's	notation).		
dt 2	
(70)															
				In	the	original	text	we	find	a	typographical	error	of	Hilbert	who	leaves	his	
"universal	variable"	l	in	the	first	member	10.			

G ( dr , dϑ , dϕ , dl ) =
  

G ( dr , dϑ , dϕ , dt ) =
  

dr 2 + r 2sin2ϑdϕ2 −

dr 2 + r 2sin2ϑdϕ2 +

m' = 0
w' = 0
  

r − α

r − α

r − α

r − α

r

r

r

r

	

																																																								

Fig.16	:	A	typographical	error	by	Hilbert.	

At	this	point,	Hilbert	is	convinced	that	he	has	found	Schwarzchild's	result.	He	
writes:		
10			Error	also	in	the	translation	published	by	Springer	(still	under	copyright):	the	
letter	l	must	be	replaced	by	the	letter	t	in	both	members.	Considering	the	number	
of	obvious	errors	in	this	translation,	available	since	2007,	that	is	to	say,	at	the	
time	of	writing,	since	14	years,	it	is	doubtful	that	this	translation	has	been	read	by	
people	mastering	general	relativity.			

	

39	

-	Für	l	=	it	die	gesuchte	Maβbestimmung	in	der	von	Schwarzschild	zuerst	
gefunden	Gestalt		

Translation	:		-	For	l	=	it	we	find	the	metric	first	constructed	by	Schwarzchild.		
It	is	this	error	that	was	very	quickly	propagated	through	successive	erroneous	
interpretations.		
	
The	true	Schwarzschild	metric.		
				Had	Schwarzschild	survived	that	spring	of	1916,	when	he	died	of	an	infection	
contracted	on	the	Russian	front,	he	would	have	immediately	brought	these	
commentators	of	his	work	back	to	the	original	form	of	it,	where	the	nature	of	R	is	
well	specified	and	corresponds	only	to	an	intermediate	quantity	(Hilfsgröβe)	and	
in	no	case	to	the	radial	distance	r.		
	

	

Fig.17	:	Schwarzschild's	true	metric,	1916	

					What	is	extraordinary	is	that	this	confusion	between	R	and	r,	which	is	the	basis	
of	Hilbert's	error,	has	been	a	standard	for	more	than	a	century,	even	though	it	
was	obvious	in	Schwarzschild's	result	in	equation	(14),	even	to	a	non-German	
speaker.	The	only	possible	explanation	was	that	this	misinterpretation	spread,	
like	the	misinterpretation	of	a	founding	text	by	people	behaving	like	medieval	
copyists.		
				In	fact,	the	generations	of	theorists	that	followed	were	satisfied	by	the	fact	that	
this	solution	fulfilled	for	them	a	consideration	that	could	be	considered	as	
fundamental:	to	identify	with	the	Lorentz	metric	at	infinity.	In	his	article	of	2003	
[11],	the	Italian	mathematician	Salvatore	Antoci	analyzes	with	the	greatest	
precision	the	mechanism	of	construction,	by	Hilbert,	of	this	error,	putting	in	
perspective	his	calculation	and	that	of	Schwarzschild.	In	another	paper	[10]	,	
Antoci	and	the	German	D.E.	Liebscher	show	that	Hilbert's	error	translates	an	
erroneous	interpretation	of	the	topology	of	the	object.		

	

40	
			To	this	we	must	add	that	for	43	years	the	only	application	that	came	to	mind	
concerned	the	linearized	form	of	this	metric.	And	this	is	the	reason	why	
Schwarzschild	himself	does	not	provide	the	expression	of	its	nonlinear	solution	
in	his	coordinates.	In	his	paper,	Schwarzschild	takes	the	case	of	the	Sun,	where	
the	large	α	is	then	3	km	,	noting:			

	

	

Fig.18	:	Schwarzschild	justifies	his	limitation	to	the	linearized	solution.	
	Translation:		

1/3	

-	Nevertheless,	Mr.	Einstein's	approach	to	the	calculation	of	the	geodesics	is	
compatible	with	the	exact	solution,	if	we	express	it	using	r	instead	of:		

(

⎞
⎠⎟

⎛
⎝⎜

)1/3

= r 1+ α3
r 3

R = r 3 + α3
  

Thus	 R	 is	 practically	 equal	 to	 r	 and	 Mr.	 Einstein's	 approach	 is	 sufficient,	

since	α/r	 is	 close	 to	 twice	 the	 square	 of	 the	 planetary	 speed	 (taking	 the	
speed	 of	 light	 as	 the	 unit).	 For	 Mercury,	 the	 order	 of	 magnitude	 is	10-12.	
beyond	the	needs	of	current	practice.		
						If	Schwarzschild	had	finalized	his	work,	which	he	did	not	find	necessary,	which	
he	would	have	done	by	expressing	the	metric	in	the	coordinates		  ( r , ϑ, ϕ, t )	this	
would	have	led	him	to	write	the	true	solution,	which	is	obtained	immediately	by	
performing	the	change	of	coordinate,	explicitly	mentioned	by	Hilbert.		An	
operation	which	would	have	made	appear	this	true	metric	solution	of	the	
Einstein	equation	without	second	member.		
			

	(71)		

	

  

ds2 =

(r 3 + Rs

3)1/3 − Rs

(r 3 + Rs

3)1/3

c2dt 2 −

r 4

(r 3 + Rs

3) (r 3 + Rs
⎡⎣

3)1/3 − Rs

⎤⎦

dr 2 − (r 3 + Rs

3)2/3( dθ2 +sin2θdϕ2)

r ≥ 0

			!	Obviously,	if	we	perform	a	series	development	according	to	the	small	
parameter	Rs/r	we	find	the	linearized	solution	of	Einstein.		
In	a	footnote	on	page	70	of	his	manuscript,	Hilbert	signs	his	obvious	
misunderstanding	of	the	relation	(number	14	without	Schwarzschild's	original	
paper;	which	accompanies	his	expression	of	its	metric	solution,	according	to	the	
intermediate	quantity	R	:				
(72)																																																							  
	

)1/3	

R = r 3 + α3

(

	

Fig.18	:	Hilbert’s	footnote	

since	there	are	simpler	ways	to	achieve	this.	

In	my	opinion	I	will	not	recommend,	as	Schwarzschild	does,	this	

Translation	:		- 
transformation	bringing	the	point	r	=	α	to	the	origin,	especially	
				Thus,	while	the	expression	according	to	the	true	radial	coordinate	r	is	
consistent	with	the	approach	followed	by	Schwarzschild,	the	fact	of	presenting	
the	result	according	to	this	intermediate	quantity	R	is	only	an	artifice	used	by	
Schwarzschild	to	stick	more	simply	with	the	linearized	solution	of	Einstein,	
Hilbert	reverses	the	reasoning	by	considering	R	as	the	radial	variable	and	r	as	an	
artifice	of	calculation	to	get	rid	of	the	singularity	in	what	he	believes	to	be	the	
origin	of	the	coordinates,	in	 R	=	0	,	whereas,	according	to	(72)	this	point	
corresponds	to	the	pure	imaginary	value:		
(73)																																																				

R3 − α3

)1/3	

(

r = i
  

	

2

→ 0

		

3r
Rs

grr !

2sin2θ

gθθ → Rs

gϕϕ → Rs

gt t → 0
   

42	
In	doing	so,	Hilbert	does	not	realize	that	he	has	left	the	domain	of	definition	of	the	
manifoold	M4.		
						An	error	that	will	lead	to	floods	of	ink	and	the	production	of	theorems	
(Penrose,	Hawking)	referring	to	a	"central	singularity",	existing	only	in	the	
imagination	of	scientists	who	have	studied	this	question,	thus	taking	for	a	reality	
what	belongs,	mathematically	speaking,	to	an	imaginary	space	domain.		
				Coming	back	to	this	expression	(71),	by	performing	a	series	development	we	
obtain	the	values	of	the	metric	potentials	when	r	tends	to	zero:	
(74)															
				At	r	=	0	the	Kretschman	scalar	is	nonzero,	so	the	sphere	is	not	a	singular	locus.	
On	the	other	hand	the	determinant	is	zero,	which	indicates	that	the	hypersurface	
is	locally	inorientable.	It	is	doubly	so,	since	the	two	potentials	and	are	zero.	If	the	
sphere	is	a	gorge	sphere,	it	reflects	a	double	inversion	of	space	and	time,	a	PT-
symmetry,	as	established	in	.	[13]].		If	we	consider	this	nullity	of	the	determinant	
as	a	singular	region"	we	can	then	conclude	that	the	hypersurface	is	not	a	4-
manifold	but	a	4-orbifold.		
				Recall,	as	Hilbert	notes,	that	these	coordinates	are	Gaussian.	We	can	therefore	
consider	a	layering	of	the	hypersurface	where	the	variable	with	t	as	parameter.	
This	corresponds	for	these	three-dimensional	hypersurfaces	to:		
	
(75)											
3)2/3( dθ2 +sin2θdϕ2)	
	These	are	themselves	subject	to	a	new	layering	at	r	=	Cst	which	gives	a	family	of	
nested	spheres	like	Russian	dolls	having	the	minimal	area,	corresponding	to	r	=	0:	
(75)																																																															  4π Rs
The	4D	hypersurface	is	therefore	non-contractile.	It	is	then	:	
-	Either	a	bordered	manifold.	
-	Either	a	geometrical	object	translating	a	space-time	bridge	between	two	
Minkowski	spaces,	realized	through	a	sphere	of	throat	area	  4π Rs
We	can	produce	a	finer	description	of	the	object	by	introducing	a	variable	
through	the	change	of	variable	[13].		:		
(77)																																																					  r = Rs( 1+ Ln chρ )		
The	metric	then	becomes:		

dr 2 + (r 3 + Rs

3) (r 3 + Rs
⎡⎣

dσ2 =
  

2.		

3)1/3 − Rs

(r 3 + Rs

2	

r 4

⎤⎦

	

	

ds2 =
  

43	

)

c2dt 2 − Rs

th2ρdρ2 − Rs

(
2 1+ Logchρ

Logchρ
1+ Logchρ

2 1+ Logchρ
Logchρ

(
)2 dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2

gtt	but	now	  

(78)	
				The	determinant	is	always	zero	because	of	the	term		 
gρρ → 2.		
			This	explains	why	theorists	have	massively	embarked	on	this	erroneous	
interpretation	of	Schwarzschild's	solution,	which	is	repeated	on	several	points.		
->	The	fact	that	the	non-linear	aspects	of	the	solution	were	taken	into	
account	only	in	1939,	after	the	publication	of	a	key	article	[14]	by	R.	
Oppenheimer,	without	references,	which	we	will	mention	in	the	following.		
->	The	fact,	highly	probable,	that	no	cosmologist,	starting	from	this	
"founding	article"	had	the	curiosity	to	take	a	look	at	the	original	article,	in	
German,	in	which	case	the	equation	(14)	of	this	paper	should	have	attracted	
their	attention.		
->	The	fact	that	this	curiosity	came	up	against	the	fact	that	these	German	
texts	were	only	available,	until	the	advent	of	the	internet	and	pdf	files,	in	
books	that	were	generally	expensive.		
->	The	fact	that	Schwarzschild's	article	was	only	translated	into	English	in	
1999	[6],	i.e.	86	years	after	its	publication	in	its	original	form.		
->	The	fact	that	the	translations	of	the	documents	that	are	essential	to	clear	
up	this	matter	were	only	translated	into	English	in	2007	([1],	[2]),	that	is	91	
years	after	their	publication,	and	are	still	covered	by	a	scandalous	copyright.		
->	In	1960	the	publication	by	M.D.Kruskal	[15]	of	the	construction	of	an	
analytical	extension	allowing	to	"penetrate	inside	the	Schwarzschild	
sphere"	gives	the	illusion	of	a	progress	in	the	understanding	of	this	
geometry,	with	that	it	does	not	change	anything	to	the	case.	This	extension,	
which	refers	to	an	imaginary	r-value,	is	outside	the	definition	space	of	the	
geometric	object.	In	the	same	way	one	could	build	an	analytical	extension	
allowing	to	study	a	torus	inside	its	throat	circle.		
->	To	this	we	must	add,	for	more	than	half	a	century,	the	illusory	conviction	
of	a	progress	in	the	understanding	of	this	solution,	whereas	the	generalized	
contagion	of	this	flagrant	error	has	made	thousands	of	publications	fall	into	
what	is	nothing	but	science	fiction.		
	
				In	1939	the	hypothesis	of	the	existence	of	neutron	stars	was	already	circulating,	
although	their	existence	was	only	confirmed	in	1967	by	the	discovery	of	pulsars.	
In	their	article	[14]	J.R.	Oppenheimer	and	H.Snyder	explicitly	mention	them.	In	

The	birth	act	of	the	black	hole	model.		

	

44	
fact,	it	all	started	with	an	article	published	a	few	months	earlier	by	R.C.	Tolman,	
then	working	at	Caltech	[16].		
	

Fig.19		:	Richard	Tolman	and	Albert	Einstein		

	We	find	this	expression	of	the	metric:	
	

Fig.20	:	Tolmans’	line	element.		

	

This	description	still	places	us	in	Gaussian	coordinates.	We	can	therefore	leaf	
through	the	space-time	by	using	t	as	a	parameter,	translating	a	simple	temporal	

	

	

	

45	
translation	and	by	considering	the	three-dimensional	hypersurfaces	described	by	
the	metric:		
(79)																																						  dσ2 = eλ(r ) dr 2 + r 2dθ2 + r 2sin2θdϕ2		
				Hypersurfaces	that	can	be	foded	through	a	family	of	area	spheres	  4πr 2	.	Can	
this	area	be	brought	to	zero?	If	so,	this	will	mean	that	the	geometric	object	
associated	with	this	portion	of	space-time	is	contractible.		
				Moreover,	by	introducing	the	two	functions	  e ν(r )and	  e λ(r )	strictly	positive,	if	we	
are	in	a	mode	governed	by	reals,	Tolman	rejects	a	possible	modification	of	the	
hyperbolic	signature	which,	for	him,	is	(	-	-	-	+	);	or	(	+	-	-	-)	according	to	the	order	
of	the	terms.	
	

	

	
Fig.21	:	Tolman's	expression	after	Oppenheimer	and	Snyder.		

					This	work	is	in	fact	a	resumption	of	the	second	article	[17]	published	by	
Karl	Schwarzschild,	just	before	his	death,	where	he	entirely	constructs	the	
geometry	inside	a	sphere	filled	with	an	incompressible	matter,	of	constant	
density.	R.Oppenheimer	and	H.Snyder	quote	him	in	the	article	they	published	
in	1939	[14]	and	start	again	from	the	same	form	of	the	metric,	this	time	to	
take	up	the	question	of	geometry	outside	the	mass.	The	question	of	the	end	of	
life	of	stars	having	exhausted	their	fusion	fuel	is	at	the	center	of	the	article.	
The	accentuation	of	the	gravitational	redshift	is	evoked,	as	the	contraction	of	
the	star	increases.	The	free	fall	time	of	a	test	particle	is	calculated	in	two	ways.	
The	authors	show	that	if	we	rely	on	the	proper	time,	this	time	is	finite,	and	
very	short.	On	the	other	hand,	if	we	measure	this	time	by	using	the	coordinate	
t	,	which	is	supposed	to	refer	to	the	proper	time	of	an	observer	located	at	a	
great	distance	from	the	object,	this	time	becomes	infinite.		
					This	remark	signs	the	birth	of	the	Black	Hole	model,	according	to	the	
following	reasoning:		
	

	

46	

->	A	star,	no	longer	able	to	counterbalance	the	force	of	gravity	with	the	
help	 of	 pressure,	 undergoes	 a	 free	 fall	 towards	 its	 center,	 which	
nothing	can	counteract.		
	
->	Without	undertaking	a	description	of	this	phenomenon,	we	rely	on	
the	 data	 emanating	 from	 the	 metric	 describing	 the	 exterior	 of	 this	
object,	which	we	will	call	"Schwarzschild's	exterior	metric".	
->	 By	 calculating	 the	 free	 fall	 times	 of	 test-mass,	 if	 we	 find	 that	 it	
reaches	 the	 Schwarzschild	 sphere	 in	 a	 finite	 time,	 this	 time	 becomes	
infinite	by	an	observer	located	at	a	great	distance.	For	the	latter,	this	
implosion	phenomenon	seems	to	be	like	a	frozen.		
	
->	At	the	same	time,	the	radiation	emitted	by	the	matter	undergoes	a	
gravitational	redshift	effect	which	becomes	infinite	when	this	signal	is	
emitted	from	a	point	located	on	the	Schwarzschild	sphere	of	radius	Rs.	
Thus,	 a	 fortiori,	 no	 radiation	 can	 cross	 this	 sphere	 which	 will	 be	
qualified	as	cosmological	horizon.		

->	I	do	not	feel	obliged	to	describe	a	phenomenon	which	for	me,	
an	outside	observer,	lasts	an	infinite	time.	

				An	outside,	distant	observer	will	then	perceive	this	object	as	a	perfectly	black	
disk,	which	will	be	called	a	black	hole.		
				This	reasoning	allows	us	to	free	ourselves	from	the	description	of	the	collapse	
phenomenon	by	starting	from	the	reasoning:		
	
					This	also	allows	us	to	reduce	the	description	of	the	geometry	of	the	object	to	
the	only	geometry	referring	to	the	outside	of	the	horizon	sphere,	thus	to	a	
solution	of	Einstein's	equation	that	refers	to	a	portion	of	the	empty	universe.	
Assuming	that	one	can	start	from	the	solution	of	figure	21	to	calculate	the	free	fall	
time	of	a	witness	particle	up	to	the	point	r	=	0	,	supposed	to	be	the	"center"	of	the	
object,	one	obtains	a	finite	and	brief	value.	We	deduce,	although	we	cannot	carry	
out	any	observation	on	what	happens	and	has	happened	inside	the	horizon	
sphere,	that	all	the	matter	is	concentrated	in	a	central	singularity.		
					This	reasoning	is	based	on	the	assumption	that	the	considered	expression	of	
the	solution	has	a	physical	meaning.	However,	as	mentioned	above,	this	is	not	the	
result	found	by	Schwarschild	in	1916	but	the	result	of	the	error	committed	by	
Hilbert,	by	confusing	the	intermediate	quantity		  
)1/3	with	the	radial	
distance	r.	Considering	to	exploit	a	calculation	referring	to	a	value	 r	<	 ro	
(	Schwarzschild	radius)	one	is	simply	outside	the	four-dimensional	hypersurface,	
which	can	be	seen	immediately	from	the	fact	that	the	exponential	functions	
become	negative.	Now	:		
	(80)																																										 e λ = − n → λ = Ln n + iπ	
	

R = r 3 + α3

(

	

The	emergence	of	surrealism	in	physics.		

47	
				A	complex	function	appears,	itself	a	function	of	a	complex	value	of	the	variables.	
Thus	the	supposed	"interior"	of	such	an	object	exists	only	in	the	imagination	of	
theorists,	in	the	strict	sense,	since	they	decide	to	consider	as	real	what	is	
imaginary.	
		
	The	years	have	passed.	No	theorist	cares	to	return	to	the	founding	texts,	nor	to	
consider	another	model.	Here	are	the	arguments	that	appear	in	all	the	books	and	
manuals	intended	for	the	training	of	students.	As	an	example,	we	reproduce	
elements	of	section	6.8	of	chapter	6	of	the	book	of	reference	[18].	The	choice	of	
the	form	of	the	metric	introduced	by	Tolman	[16]	is	then	simply	presented	as	
"reasonable".			
When	r	becomes	less	than	2I	(the	Schwarzschild	radius),	the	signs	of	the	
components	of	the	metric	(potential	metric	referring	to	time)	  
g11(	metric	
g11becomes	
potential	referring	to	the	assumed	radial	coordinate)	change,		  
positive	ans	  
goo	negative.	This	forces	us	to	reconsider	the	physical	meaning	(...)	
given	to	the	variables	t	and	r	as	a	system	of	marking	time	and	radius,	inside	the	
Schwarzschild	sphere.	In	fact	a	line	of	universe	which	is	described	according	to	a	
t	,	that	is	to	say	with	  (r , θ , ϕ ) 	constants,		corresponds		to	  ds2 < 0	.	It’s	a	spacelike	
curve,	while	a	line	of	universe	for	which	  ds2 > 0	is	a	timelike	curve.		
					And	there	you	come	across	the	consequence	of	another	of	Hilbert's	errors,	that	
of	endowing	space-time	with	two	systems	of	measurement,	the	second	referring	
to	portions	of	curves	that	he	calls	"segments"	and	for	which	the	sign	of	the	
bilinear	form	is	inverted.		
	

Fig.22	:	The	second	"length"	measured	on	Hilbert	«	segments	».		

	

	

	

48	
Translation	:		-	A	portion	of	a	curve	where	(the	form	G	is	positive)	will	be	called	a	
segment,	while	(the	expression	giving	the	scalar	 λ	)	is	the	length	of	
this	segment.		
This	vision	of	things	is	in	total	contradiction	with	the	one	of	Einstein,	K.	
Schwarzschild,	J.	Droste,	H.Weyl,	and	all	the	scientist-mathematicians	who	at	that	
time	contributed	to	the	construction	of	the	general	relativity.	In	the	article	of	
Schwarzschild,	for	example,	we	read:		
	

Fig.23	:	How	Schwarzschild	defines	length,	essentially	positive.		

	

	Translation	:		

-	 Consider	 a	 point	 that	 moves	 according	 to	 (the	 expressions	 in	 the	
figure),	 where	 the	 variables	 are	 functions	 of	 the	 x	 variables	
(coordinates	of	points	of	the	space-time	hypersurface)	and	where	the	
values	of	x	must	be	considered	as	constant	at	the	beginning	and	at	
the	end	of	the	path	followed	for	the	integration.	Clearly,	the	point	will	
have	 to	 move	 according	 to	 a	 geodesic	 of	 the	 variety	 (manifold)	
characterized	by	the	element	ds.			

					How	did	Hilbert	come	to	endow	space-time	with	two	lengths?	Perhaps	he	had	in	
mind	to	create	a	metaphysics,	with	respect	to	the	events	occurring	inside	(...)	the	
Schwarzschild	sphere.		
		Let's	go	back	to	the	text	of	the	reference	[18].	
	
-	Let	us	take	again	the	text	of	the	reference	It	would	thus	appear	

natural	 (...)	 to	 treat	 r	 as	 a	 time	 coordinate	 and	 t	 as	 a	 radial	

	

49	

coordinate	 (...).	 We	 interpret	 ds/c	 as	 the	 proper	 time	 along	 the	
lines	of	universe	traveled	by	a	particle.	Then,	as	we	have	shown	in	
section	 4.2,	 this	 definition	 only	 has	 a	 physical	 meaning	 if	 .	
Similarly,	 a	 massive	 particle	 cannot	 maintain	 itself	 on	 a	
trajectory	with	constant	r	inside	the	Schwarzschild	sphere,	which	

would	imply	that	  ds2 < 0 		along	this	line	of	universe.	

									Let	us	quote	the	"standard"	derivation	of	the	so-called	Schwarzschild	solution,	
e.g.,	by	quoting	the	corresponding	pages	of	chapter	6	of	the	1975	book	of	
reference	[18].	Page	186	equation	(6.4)	represents	the	most	general	form	of	the	
metric,	in	the	absence	of	cross	terms.	The	minus	sign	shows	that	the	authors	
intend,	with	A	,	B	,	C	;	D	positive,	to	introduce	the	signature	of	the	metric	right	
away:		
	

	
					But	in	the	last	lines	we	read	"nevertheless,	it	is	possible	to	obtain	an	additional	
simplification	by	a	judicious	choice	of	radial	coordinate"	

Fig.24	:		Excerpt	from	page	186	of	the	reference	[18]	

	

	

50	

Fig.	25	:	Excerpt	from	page	187	of	the	referenc	[18].	

	
	
						And	there	we	see,	reproduced	identically,	the	reasoning	held	by	Hilbert	in	his	
1916	paper,	which	shows	that	he	is	at	the	origin	of	this	distortion	of	the	true	
Schwarzschild	solution.	In	equation	(6.9)	the	authors	take	up	the	introduction,	in	
1939,	of	two	exponentials	by	Tolman	[16]	and	Oppenheimer	[14].	They	even	
specify	 that	 these	 functions	 are	 "intrinsically	 positive"	 and	 that	 "these	
coordinates	have	a	clear	physical	meaning",	whereas,	precisely,	attributing	a	
physical	meaning	to	coordinates	is	the	first	source	of	error.		
	Six	pages	later,	on	page	193,	we	find	the	result	of	their	calculation:		
		

	

51	

	
		

	
Fig.	25	:	Extrait	de	la	page	193	de	la	référence	[18].	

2m
r

e λ = − 1−
  

+ iπ	

The	artifact	of	the	Kruskal	coordinates.	

2m
r → λ = Ln 1−

					If	these	exponential	functions	are	"intrinsically	positive",	then	the	variable	r	
cannot	be	less	than	2m,	otherwise	the	quantities	and	would	correspond	to:		
	(81)																											
					
						In	spite	of	this	obvious	contradiction	D.Kruskal	has	constructed	an	analytical	
extension,	so	as	to	be	able	to	build	a	description	of	this	"interior	of	the	
Schwarzschild	sphere	(	0	<	r	<	2m	).	The	reader	will	find	the	"standard"	
construction	of	these	new	coordinates	u	and	v	,	as	well	as	the	resulting	metric,	in	
pages	226	to	230	of	the	reference	[18].	We	will	only	reproduce	the	equations	
themselves.	First,	we	have	the	two	equations	identified	by	(6.91)	in	the	book:		
	(82)																																																
2m − 1 	
	(83)																																																					
	
						
				From	these	relations	it	is	established	by	introducing	the	intermediate	quantity	
η	,	equation	(6.200)	of	reference	[18]	shows	that:		
	(84)																																																								  F (ξ) = η2 e 2ηξ
	
			We	then	read,	in	the	equations	(6.201)	:	
						

ξ = r + 2m Ln
  

F (ξ) =
  

1− 2m / r

f 2

r

	

	(85)		
	

	Then:		
	

52	

2mη

u =

⎛
⎝⎜

r
2m − 1

⎞
⎠⎟

e ηr ch ηx°

2mη

v =

⎛
⎝⎜

r
2m − 1

⎞
⎠⎟

e ηr sh ηx°

	

2m
η2 r

⎛
⎝⎜

r
2m − 1

⎞
⎠⎟

f 2 =

  

1− 4mη

e −2ηr

Fig.	26	:	From	page	229	of	the	reference	[18].		

	
	
	
	The	scalar	m	being	real, η	is	therefore	also	real.		
	This	leads	to	the	final	expression	of	the	new	variables,	in	two	configurations.			
	(86)				r	>	2m		:			
	

u =

v =

r

2m − 1 e r /4m ch x°

4m

r

2m − 1 e r /4m sh x°

4m

	

32m3

r

f 2 =

  

e r /2m

u2 − v2 =
  

⎛
⎝⎜

r
2m − 1

⎞
⎠⎟ e r/2m

v

u = th x°

4m

		

		(87)																																

	

	And	
	(88)					r	<	2m	:	

53	

u =

1 −

r
2m

e r /4m sh x°
4m

v =

1 −

r
2m

e r /4m ch x°
4m

	

	

  

r

u

⎛
⎝⎜

4m

f 2 =

32m3

e r /2m

r
2m

⎞
⎠⎟ e r/2m

v2 − u2 = 1−

v = th x°

With	:		
(89)																														  
		
	The	metric	then	takes	the	form,	equation	(6.187)	of	the	reference	[18]:		
	(90)																								  ds2 = f 2(u,v)( dv2 − du2 ) − r 2( dθ2 + sin2θdϕ2 )		
						Although	this	metric	is	not	identified	with	the	Lorentz	metric	at	infinity,	when	
we	form	ds	=	0	we	have	,	see	equation	(6.188)	of	reference	[18]	:		
	(91)																																																													
	Here	is	the	famous	Kruskal	diagram:		
	

= 1		

du
dv

⎛
⎝⎜
  

⎞
⎠⎟

2

	

54	

	

	

Fig.27	:	Kruskal	diagram.	

	
				If	one	follows	this	diagram,	where	all	quantities	become	real,	with	a	real	ds	one	
thus	manages	to	penetrate	"inside	the	Schwarzschild	sphere".	The	points	located	
at	constant	r	are	on	hyperbolas.	The	one	on	the	right	refers	to	the	value	r	=	4m.	
The	path	A	is	that	of	a	particle	with	mass,	which	plunges	towards	the	
Schwarzschild	sphere.	The	half	line	x°	=	2m	evokes	the	way	time	evolves.	In	the	
chosen	coordinate	system	this	mass	reaches	this	sphere	in	an	infinite	time,	
shown	by	the	half	line	v	=	u	.	Then,	assuming	that	this	point-mass	can	penetrate	
inside	this	sphere,	it	continues	its	way	and	reaches	the	point	associated	with	a	
zero	value	of	r	which	is	another	hyperbola	accompanied	by	hatching,	which	is	
supposed	to	represent	"the	singularity".	A	similar	reasoning	is	associated	to	the	
trajectory	B.		
								By	a	real	magic	wand,	Kruskal	seems	to	have	transformed	an	unreal	portion	of	
the	variety	into	something	real,	described	by	equations	(85)	to	(89).	But	we	have	
to	remember	that	if	with	real	quantities,	like	space-time	coordinates,	we	can	
obtain	a	complex	quantity	ds,	the	opposite	is	also	possible.		
	So	we	have	to	go	back	to	Kruskal's	approach.	Let	us	explain	the	relation	(84)		
	(92)																																																								
16m2 e ξ/2m	
	Within	the	Schwarzschild	sphere	(83)	indicates	that:		
	(93)																																																							
< 0	
	Combined	with	the	previous	equation	this	gives	us:		

F (ξ) = η2 e 2ηξ =
  

F (ξ) =
  

1− 2m / r

f 2

1

	

55	

⎡⎣

ξ = r + 2m Ln
  

r
2m − 1 = 2m Ln 16m2 F (χ)

	(94)																																																  e ξ/2m = 16m2 F (ξ) < 0	
	Now	the	exponential	can	only	be	negative	if	the	exponent	is	complex:		
		(95)																																											  ξ = 2m Ln 16m2 F (χ)
⎤⎦ −iπ	
	Note	all	the	calculation	has	been	based	on	the	hypothesis	(82),	which	leads	to:	
	(96)																		
⎤⎦ −iπ		
				There	is	therefore	a	contradiction.	This	relation	becomes	incoherent.	In	the	two	
members	of	an	equation,	one	cannot	be	real	and	the	other	complex.	This	
analytical	extension	makes	sense	if	we	are	in	the	mode	of	complexes,	but	it	does	
not	make	sense	in	the	mode	of	physics,	which	is	in	the	world	of	reals.		
			
The	interpretation	of	Hermann	Weyl	(	1917)	
						In	1915	Hermann	Weyl	was	thirty	years	old.	After	having	taught	mathematics	
at	the	University	of	Göttingen,	where	he	was	fascinated	by	the	revolutionary	
ideas	introduced	by	Riemann	and	particularly	by	hyperbolic	varieties,	he	found	a	
position	in	Zurich,	at	the	Federal	Polytechnic,	where	he	was	offered	a	chair.	He	
then	met	Einstein	and	quickly	assimilated	the	basic	concepts	of	relativity,	first	
special	and	then	general.		Discovering	the	exact	nonlinear	solution	found	by	Karl	
Schwarzschild,	he	published	his	interpretation	in	1917	[19].		
		

⎡⎣

	
Fig.28	:	Hermann	Weyl	in	1915	

	

	

56	
							To	access	the	German	version	of	this	article,	published	more	than	a	century	
ago	but	copyrighted	by	Springer	in	a	2012	republication	which	also	includes	the	
English	translation,	it	will	cost	you	$49,	regardless	of	the	version.	In	this	paper,	
unlike	Hilbert's,	the	letter	R	is	used	to	designate	the	Riemann	scalar:		
	

	

	

Fig.29	:	Derivation	of	the	field	equation	by	Weyl.		

	
				The	first	equation	shows	that	Weyl	immediately	integrated	the	technique	of	
derivation	of	the	field	equation	by	the	variational	method,	with	the	introduction	
of	the	Ricci	tensor	and	the	scalar	R	derived	from	it.	At	the	bottom,	we	see	the	field	
equation	to	which	Einstein	gave	his	name,	in	the	form	(equivalent	to	that	of	his	
publication	of	November	25,	1916	[4])	that	students	know	today.	The	first	thing	
that	Weyl	does	is	to	remind	us	of	the	inequality	which	gives	the	solution	a	
physical	character:		
	

	

57	

	

	

Fig.30	:	Length	measurement,	after	H.Weyl	[21].	

					Like	Schwarzschild,	he	is	perfectly	clear	in	his	choice	of	Gaussian	coordinates	
  ( x1, x2 , x3 , x4 ).	The	space-time	is	therefore	foldable	by	means	of	a	sequence	of	
three-dimensional	hypersurfaces,	invariant	with	respect	to	time	x4.	The	problem	
is	to	construct	this	stationary	three	dimensional	hypersurface,	described	by	the	
coordinates	  ( x1, x2 , x3 )	and	defined	by	its	length	element	 dσ	according	to	:		
(97)																																																			  ds2 = f dx4
				If	we	compare	the	choices	made	by	Weyl	with	Schwarzschild's	approach,	the	
latter	carries	out	his	calculation	with	a	coordinate	r	which	is	in	fact	his	
intermediate	quantity	R.	He	calculates	the	function	f	as	well	as	the	expressions	of	
the	three	other	metric	potentials.		

2 − dσ2		

	
	Fig.31	:	Result	of	the	calculation	of	the	potential	  
g44 = f		[21].	
Like	Schwarzschild,	he	makes	appear	what	he	calls	the	 gravitational	 radius	
associated	to	a	mass	m.		His	metric	can	be	summarized	as:		
⎠⎟ dt 2 − dσ2		
(98)								

− r 2 ( dϑ2 + sin2ϑdϕ2 ) = 1− 2a
r

⎞
⎠⎟ dt 2 −

⎛
⎝⎜

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞

ds2 = 1− 2a
r
  

dr 2
1− α
r

	

58	

dσ2 =

dr 2
1− 2 a
r

+ r 2 ( dϑ2 + sin2ϑdϕ2 )		

With	the	3D	hypersurface	11	defined	by	the	metric:		
(99)																																							
			But	Weyl	is	not	naive	enough	to	consider	that	this	solution	could	make	physical	
sense	for	r	<	2a,	where	the	length	element	would	cease	to	be	real.	This	variable	r	
(which	is	not	the	same	as	the	one	in	the	Schwarzschild	paper)	corresponds	to	a	
ray	vector	with	coordinates	  ( x1, x2 , x3 ).	It	is	a	3-dimensional	hypersurface	which	
we	know	"exists"	only	for	r	>	2a.	Weyl	will	therefore	push	further,	to	pierce	the	
secret	of	its	geometry,	and	more	precisely	of	its	topology.	On	these	three	space	
coordinates	he	can	always	delete	one	of	them.	So	he	writes:		
	

  

Fig.	32	:	The	analysis	of	the	topology	of	the	3D	hypersurface	by	Weyl	
11	We	recognize	the	metric	of	our	"3D	diabolo"	from	the	beginning	of	the	article.	

																																																								

	

	

59	

  

⎞

⎛
⎝⎜

	

2a
r

x2 = r sinϑ

x1 = r cosϑ

dσ2 = hdr 2 + r 2dϑ2

dσ2 = 1−
  

⎠⎟ dr 2 + r 2dϑ2	
⎠⎟ dr 2	

In	 order	 to	 determine	 the	 geometry	 which	 is	 characterized	 by	 the	
form	of	the	metric	giving		  dσ2 	,	we	will	project	in	a	corresponding	
plane	à	  x3 = 0 	.	If	we	introduce	the	polar	coordinates:		

Then	he	weites:		
- 
	
Ce	qui	lui	donne	:		
				In	the	following,	it	does	exactly	what	we	did	for	the	3D	diabolo,	i.e.	it	sets	the	
angle	 ϑ	to	determine	the	equation	of	the	meridian,	which	gives	it	the	differential	
equation:		
(100)																																																		
Whose	solution	is:		
(101)																		  z = 8a (r − 2a )			or			
							We	find	the	equation(19)	of	the	lying	parabola.	The	hypersurface	is	thus	a	"3D	
diabolo"	which	is	the	projection	of	the	3D	hypersurface	in	a	Euclidean	space	
  ( x1, x2 , x3 ).	And		Weyl	adds	:		
-  Die	 projektion	 bedekt	 das	 äubere	 doppelt	:	This	projection	covers	
twice	(doppelt	)	the	portion	of	space	  r > 2a,	 das	innere	überhaupt	
nicht	:	but	this	(3D)	structure	definitively	does	not	fit	the	portion	of	
space	  r < 2a12	.	 BeI	 natürlicher	 analytischer	 Fortsetzung	 wird	 also	
der	xi	das	durch	  r ≥ 2a	gekennziechnete	Gebeit	dopplet	überdecken	:		
In	a	natural	analytical	extension,	the	real	space	in	the	coordinates	
used	for	the	representation	of	the	coordinate	 xi	of	the	point	
correspond	two	points	of	the	3D	hypersurface.		On	this	sphere	of	
radius	2a,	which	makes	the	junction	between	these	two	coverings,	
is	located	the	mass.					
	Là	on	voit	poindre	une	idée	tout	à	fait	extraordinaire,	assimilant	les	masses	à	
des	singularités	topologiques.	On	se	rappellera	que	la	topologie,	à	cette	époque,	
12	On	dirait	aujourd’hui	:	cette	hypersurface	3D	constitue	le	revêtement	à	deux	
feuillets	de	la	portion	d’un	espace	Euclidien	3	extérieur	à	une	sphère	de	rayon	2a.		

der	wirkliche	Raum	in	dem	zur	Darstellung	benuntzen	Koordinaten	

dr 2 + dz2 = 1−
  

z 2
8a = Rs +

r = 2a +
  

z 2
4Rs

2a
r

	

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞

																																																								

	

	

60	
est	en	train	de	naître	en	tant	que	discipline	mathématique.	Les	surfaces	fermées	
régulières	2D	sont	au	nombre	de	quatre.	On	a	la	sphère,	le	tore,	puis	la	bouteille	
de	Klein	et	la	surface	de	Boy.			Précisos	que	Félix	Klein	invente	sa	bouteille	en	
1882,	tandis	que	Werner	Boy,	élève	de	Hilbert,		créera	sa	propre	surface	en	
1902.	Comme	Schwarzschild	ce	dernier	s’engage	à	35	ans,	dès	l’entrée	en	guerre	
de	l’Allemagne,	en	juillet	1914		et	est	tué	en	France,	où	il	repose,	en	septembre	
de	la	même	année.		
				Weyl	(who	also	joined	the	army,	but	was	discharged	for	health	reasons)	
continued	his	analysis	of	the	3D	hypersurface.	He	is	thus	the	first	to	introduce	the	
isotropic	form	of	the	metric.		
	

	

Fig.	33	:	Isotropic	form	of	the	Schwarzschild	metric.	

	
				His	variable	r	is	not	the	previous	one.	Its	formula	(12)	corresponds	to	equation	
(6.69)	of	reference	[18].	The	last	expression	represents	the	linear	expansion	
coefficient	(lineare	Vergröberungsverhältnis).		
					It	is	clear	that	Weyl	has	perfectly	integrated	the	fact	that	the	various	
coordinates	are	only	representations	of	the	objects	defined	by	their	metrics	and	
that	the	only	object	endowed	with	an	intrinsic	reality	(invariant	by	any	change	of	
coordinates)	is	the	element	of	length	s	.	These	successive	choices	allow	us	to	
discover	their	topology.	Thus,	in	1917	is	the	first	to	discover	that	the	geometry	
discovered	by	Schwarzschild	is	non-contractile.		
	

	

61	
The	P-symmetry	that	goes	with	the	passage	of	the	throat	sphere.		
					Weyl	thus	creates	this	concept	of	a	representation	space	and	a	two-sheet	
covering	of	a	manifold.	The	homologous	points	of	these	two	four-dimensional	
sheets	can	thus	be	identified	using	the	same	coordinates	xi.	We	can	consider	four	
points	in	the	vicinity	of	a	point	of	coordinates	 xi	which	form	a	tetrahedron	
consisting	of	four	equilateral	triangles	having	two	common	vertices.	We	can	
define	a	positive	orientation	by	defining	a	direction	of	travel	of	these	triangles,	
considered	as	positive.	This	one	defines	a	normal	vector.	The	following	figure	
shows	what	happens	to	this	set	of	points	when	they	cross	the	throat	sphere.	The	
tetrahedron	with	black	edges	is	supposed	to	belong	to	one	of	the	two	
tridimensional	layers	of	the	object.	Let	one	of	its	faces	ABC,	the	positive	direction	
of	travel,	arbitrary,	being	indicated	by	arrows.	The	tetrahedron	with	the	shaded	
edges	A'B'C'	belongs	to	the	other	layer.	If	we	bring	these	two	objects	into	
coincidence	we	can	see	that	the	two	directions	are	the	opposite	of	each	other	
		

	

	Fig.34	:	Reversal	of	the	orientation	of	a	tetrahedron	after	crossing	the	throat	
sphere.		
													We	deduce	that	any	object	crossing	the	throat	sphere	of	the	Schwarzschild	
geometry	undergoes	a	P-symmetry.		
	
						The	black	hole	model	is	based	on	the	complete	decoupling	of	the	proper	time	
of	objects	accompanying	the	implosion	phenomenon	that	this	geometry	is	
supposed	to	describe	and	the	proper	time	of	an	observer	located	at	infinity,	
observing	the	phenomenon,	which	for	him	is	supposed	to	last	an	infinite	time.	Let	
us	consider	radial	trajectories.	We	have	(keeping	the	Schwarzschild	notation)		:		

Free	fall	time	or	escape	time	in	Schwarzschild	geometry.		

62	

x4 = ct		

	

  

⎛
⎝⎜

2 −

Rs
R

⎞
⎠⎟ dx4

ds2 = 1−

(102)																
The	Lagrange	equations	give:		
(103)																																																								
	(104)																																																				
The	integration	gives	the	diagram:			
	

s = cτ

dR2
Rs
R

1−

	

	

R
Rs

R

dτ
dR = ±
  

1
c

dt
dR = ±
  

1
c

R - Rs

	

	

Fig.	35	:	The	free	fall	time.		

	The	witness	particle	reaches	the	throat	sphere	in	a	finite	time,	in	terms	of	its	own	
time,	but	this	path	corresponds	to	an	infinite	time	for	a	distant	observer.		
	
					In	1963	Roy	Kerr	constructed	the	solution	of	the	Einstein	equation	without	a	
second	member	[20],	describing	a	portion	of	empty	space,	invariant	by	time	
translation	and	by	action	of	the	group	O(2).		
		

The	Kerr	metric.		

	

  

⎞

(

⎛
⎝⎜

⎛
⎝⎜

⎡
⎢
⎣

ρ2

dρ2

2 mρ

2 m
ρ

cdt dϕ

)dθ2

ds2 = 1 −

ds2 = 1 −

− ρ2 + a

ρ2 + a2 cos2θ

⎞
⎠⎟ c2dt 2 −

dρ2 − ρ2 + a2 cos2θ

(105)	

2mρa2 sin4θ
ρ2 + a2 cos2θ

(
4mρasin2θ
ρ2 + a2 cos2θ

63	
	
⎠⎟ c2dt 2 − ρ2 + a2 cos2θ
					The	parameter	a	figures	the	importance	of	the	rotation.	If	it	is	zero	we	find	the	
)sin2θ +
Schwarzschild	metric.	In	the	plane	this	metric	becomes:		
(106)	

ρ2 + a2 − 2mρ
⎤
⎥dϕ2 −
⎦

	
					Consider	two	rays	of	light	emitted	tangentially	to	a	trajectory	at	ρ	constant	:		
(107)						
cdt dϕ	
					The	speed	of	light	then	takes	two	different	values,	depending	on	the	direction	
of	emission:		
(108)																									
				This	phenomenon	is	classically	interpreted	as	a	phenomenon	of	dragging	of	the	
coordinate	system	(frame-dragging)	and	is	not	without	evoking	the	idea	of	Ernst	
Mach	according	to	which	matter	and	space	would	be	closely	linked.	These	two	
values	of	the	photon	velocity	is	related	to	the	presence	of	a	cross	term	in		 dϕ dt	
The	presence	in	the	stationary	solution	of	such	a	cross	term	was	envisaged	in	
1916	by	the	Dutchman	J.	Droste13	[21],	but	immediately	rejected	by	this	author	as	
unphysical.			
				Let	us	digress	for	a	moment.	Droste,	a	student	of	Lorentz,	presented	this	work	
on	May	27,	1916,	he	was	thirty	years	old.		
	

ρ2 + a2 − 2mρ
⎡
) +
(
⎢
⎣

⎞
⎠⎟ c2dt 2 − ρ2 + a

18m2a 2 + 2mρ3 − ρ2a2 − ρ4

vϕ = c 2ma ±
  

0 = 1 −
  

⎤
⎥dϕ2 −
⎦

⎤
⎥dϕ2 −
⎦

⎦⎥		

− ρ2 + a

2m a2
ρ

2m a2
ρ

4m a
ρ

4m a
ρ

cdt dϕ

2 m
ρ

) +

⎡
⎢
⎣

⎛
⎝⎜

⎡
⎣⎢

(

⎤

  

																																																								

13	https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Droste	

	

64	

	

	
Fig.36	:	Johannes	Droste	(1886-1963)	

	

He	starts	with	the	same	assumptions	as	Schwarzschild,	and	here	is	his	result:	

Fig.37	:	Droste	metric	.	

				The	result	is	absolutely	identical	to	Schwarzchild's.	In	this	very	complete	article,	
everything	is	explained.	The	expressions	of	the	geodesics	and	the	rest.	Later	
Droste	will	say	that	when	he	presented	his	paper,	he	did	not	know	that	
Schwarzschild	had	just	solved	this	problem	three	months	earlier.		
But	let	us	return	to	Roy	Kerr's	work:		
				Since	we	admit	in	his	solution	the	presence	of	an	azimuthal	frame-dragging,	
what	do	we	obtain	if	we	consider	in	a	solution	invariant	by	action	of	O(3)	a	radial	
frame-dragging.	This	results	in	the	presence	of	a	cross	term	in	dRdt.		
Keeping	the	Schwarzschid	notations,	this	corresponds	to	the	Eddington-	metric,	
which	is	deduced	from	the	Schwarzschild	metric	by	the	change	of	variable	
δ = ± 1		
	(109)																																				
		Which	gives:	
(110)						

t = t' + δ
  

Ln ( R
Rs

Rs
c

− 1)

⎛
⎝⎜

ds2 = 1 −
  

Rs
R

⎞
⎠⎟ c2dt' 2 − 1 +

⎛
⎝⎜

Rs
R

⎞
⎠⎟ dR2 − R2( dθ2 + sin2dϕ2 ) + 2δ

Rs
R

c dt' dR	

	

1
c

1
c

λ2 − 1+

λ2 − 1+

Rs
R
Rs
R

ν( R − Rs )

ν( R − Rs )

δ = ± 1
ν = ± 1

δ = ± 1
ν = ± 1

dt'
dR =
  

dt'
dR =
  

h2Rs
R3
h2Rs
R3

Rs
R −
Rs
R −

h2
R2 +
h2
R2 +

λ R − δ ν Rs λ2 − 1+

λ R − δ ν Rs λ2 − 1+

65	
This	situation	was	recently	studied	in	[22].	The	transit	time	along	a	radial	
trajectory	becomes:		
(111)			 ν = − 1	:		centripetal	trajectory;		 ν = 1	:		centrifugal	path.	
	
																							
For	radial	paths	(	h	=	0	)		
(112)	

	
Quand	R	tend	vers	Rs	,	cette	contribution	du	temps	devient	infini	if	 δ ν < 0	
In	the	conditions:		
(113)																																																   
			It	is	therefore	possible	to	couple	two	metric	solutions,	two	sheets	connecting	
according	to	the	sphere	of	groove,	playing	then	the	role	of	one-way	membrane,	
surface	that	the	masses	can	cross	only	in	one	direction.	Let's	consider	the	
following	pair	of	metrics.	In	the	first	one,	the	masses	can	only	enter	the	throat	
sphere	in	a	short	time,	but	can	only	emerge	in	an	infinite	time,	which	is	
equivalent	to	an	impossibility.		The	opposite	situation	with	respect	to	the	second	
layer,	defined	by	the	metric	(91).	Globally	the	transit,	with	entry	into	the	first	
layer	and	emergence	into	the	second,	takes	place	in	a	finite	time.	The	reverse	
transit	is	impossible.		
	
	(114)	  
c dt' dR	
c dt' dR	
(115)	
	A	star	in	implosion	would	thus	see	its	mass	transferred	into	a	second	sheet,	
according	to	a	finite	time.		

⎞
⎠⎟ dR2 − R2( dθ2 + sin2dϕ2 ) − 2

⎞
⎠⎟ dR2 − R2( dθ2 + sin2dϕ2 ) + 2

⎞
⎠⎟ c2dt' 2 − 1 +

⎞
⎠⎟ c2dt' 2 − 1 +

R − δ ν Rs
R − Rs

ds2 = 1 −
  

ds2 = 1 −

dt'
dR !

Rs
R

Rs
R

Rs
R

Rs
R

Rs
R

Rs
R

ν
c

	

⎛
⎝⎜

⎛
⎝⎜

⎛
⎝⎜

⎛
⎝⎜

	

Epilog.		

66	
	
Frankfurt	is	the	birthplace	of	Karl	Schwarzschild.	Every	year	a	"Schwarzschild	
Colloquium"	is	held	at	the	Advanced	Studies	Institute	in	Frankfurt,	devoted	to	
questions	of	cosmology	and	astrophysics.	In	2017	the	organizers	of	the	
colloquium	had	invited	the	cosmologist	Juan	Malcadena,	member	of	the		the	
Advanced	Studies	Institute	in	Princeton,	USA.	He	began	his	conference,	devoted	
to	the	latest	advances	in	the	field	of	thermodynamics	of	black	holes	by	saying	:		
	
To	show	the	way	the	community	of	specialists	perceives	these	questions,	since	the	
sixties,	the	simplest	way	is	to	reproduce	the	main	stream	interpretation	as	it	is	
presented	in	page	223	of	the	reference	[18],	and	which	translates	a	unanimous	
consensus	within	the	community	of	cosmologists	of	today	and	the	partisans	of	the	
Black	Hole	model.		
	

-	 In	 1916,	 when	 Karl	 Schwarzschild	 published	 his	 paper,	 the	 scientific	
community	had	to	spend	some	time	before	certain	points	were	clarified.	Today	
these	problems	have	been	well	mastered.	

	

	

	

67	

Fig.44	:	Standard	interpretation	of	the	Schwarzschild	metric	
	This	present	article	shows	that	this	view	should	be	reconsidered.	
Références	:	
[1]	D.Hilbert.	Die	Grundlagen	der	Physik	(Esrte	Mitteilung).	Nachrichten	von	der	
Gesellschaft			der	Wissenschaften	zu	Göttingen.	Mathematisch-ohysikalische	
Klasse.	(1915)	395-407.			
English	translation	:	The	foundations	of	Physics	(first	communication).	English	
translation.	Boston	Series	in	Philosophy	and	Science.	Copyright	Springer,	Vol.250		
2007	(	29$95	)		
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4020-4000-9_44	
[2]	D.Hilbert.	Die	Grundlagen	der	Physik	(Esrte	Mitteilung).	Nachrochten	von	der	
Gesellschaft			der	Wissenschaften	zu	Göttingen.	Mathematisch-ohysikalische	
Klasse.	(1916)		
English	translation	:	The	foundations	of	Physics	(second	communication).	English	
translation.	Boston	Series	in	Philosophy	and	Science.	Copyright	Springer,	Vol.250		
2007	(	29$95	)		
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-1-4020-4000-9_45	
[3]	Tilman	Sauer	:	The	Relativity	Discovery	:	Hilbert’s	First	Note	on	Foundations	
of	Physis.	See	page	48.	Correspondance	Einstein-Hilbert	au	jour	le	jour.	Page	48	
https://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/9811050.pdf	
[4]	A.	Einstein	:	Die	Feldgleichungen	des	Gravitation	(	The	Field	Equation	of	
Gravitation).	Sitzungsber.	XLIV	,	8	,	778	and	XLVI	s.	799	(25	nov	1915)	
[5]	A.Einstein	:	Erlklärung	der	Perihelbeweggung	des	Merkur	aus	allgemeinen	
Relarivitätstheorie.	Königlish	Preubische	Akademie	der	Wissenschaften	(Berlin)	?	
Sitzungberichet	(25	nov.	1915)	p.	831-838	

[6]  K.  Schwarzschild :  Über  das  Gravitationsfeld  Messenpunktes  nach  der 
Einsteinschen Theorie. Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preubischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften p. 189-196. jan 1916 
English  translation  by  S.Antoci  and  A.Loinger.  On  the  gravitational  field  of  a 
mass  point  according  to  Einstein  theory.  arXiv :physics/9912033v1  [physics.hist-
ph] 16 dec 1999.  
Traduction française à partir de la version allemande par H.Traccard : 
http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/1916-Schwarzschild-fr.pdf 

	[7]	L.S.Abrams	:	Black	Hole	:	the	Legacy	of	Hilbert’s	Error.	Can.	Jr.	Phys.	67	,	9191	
(1989).		arXiv	:	gr-qc/01205055v1/13	feb	2001	

	

68	
[8]				A.Loinger	:	The	Black	holes	do	not	exist	«	Also	sprach	Karl	Schawarzschild	»	
(«	Ainsi	parlait	Karl	Schwarzschild	»).	arXiv	:physics/9905030		may	1999nb	
[9]			S.Antoci	and	D.E.	Liebscher	:	Reconsidering	Schwarzschild	original	solution.	
Astronomische	Nachrichten	322	(2001),	3,	137-174	
[10]		S.Antoci	and	D.E.	Liebscher	:	The	Topology	of	Schwarzschild	Original	
Solution.	arXiv	:	gr-qc/0308005v3		26	sept	2005.	
[11]	S.Antoci	.	David	Hilbert	and	the	origin	of	the	Schwarzschild	Solution.	(2003)	
https/arxiv.org/abs/physics/0310104		
[12]	A.A.Vankov	:	Explanation	of	the	Perihelion	of	Mercury	From	General	
Relativity	».	Gen.Sc.Jr.	Researchgate.net.	(2021)	
[13]	J.P.Petit	&	G.D’Agostini	:	Cancellation	of	the	singularity	of	the	Schwarzschild	
solution	with	natural	mass	inversion	process.	Mod.	Phys.	Lett.	A	vol.	30	n°9		
(2015).	arXiv	:	gr-qc/2103.12845/13	feb	2001(	23	March	2021)	
[14]	J.R.Oppenheimer	and	H.Snyder	:	On	Continued	Gravitational	Contraction.	Phys.	
Rev.	Vol.	56	pp	455-459	sept	1939	
https://journals.aps.org/pr/pdf/10.1103/PhysRev.56.455	
[15]	M.D	Kruskal	:	Maximal	extension	of	Schwarzschild	metric.	Phys.	Rev.	119,	1734	
(1°	sept	1060).		
[16]	R.C.Tolman	:		Static	Solutions	of	Einstein’s	field	equation	for	a	sphere	of	fluid.	
Phys.	Rev.	1939	nol.55	(	15feb.	1939)	
https://authors.library.caltech.edu/4362/1/TOLpr39.pdf	
[17]	K.Schwarzschild	:	Über	das	Gravitationsfeld	einer	Kugel	aus	incompressibler	
Flüssigkeit	nach	der	Einsteinschen	Theorie.	Sitzund	der	Phys.	Math.	Klasse	V.24	
24	Februar	1916	
[18]	R.Adler,	M.Bazin,	M.Schiffer	:	Introduction	to	General	Relativity,	Mc	Graw	Hill	
Books	Cie,	1975.	http://www.jp-petit.org/books/asb.pdf	
[19]	H.Weyl	:	Zu	Gravitationstherie.	Annalen	der	physik,	Vol.35	n°	18	(1917)	
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/andp.19173591804	:	49	$	
On	the	Theory	of	Gravitation.	Reprinted	in	Gen.	Relat.	And	Gravit.	Vol.	44	pp	779-
810		(2012).	
	https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10714-011-1310-7	:	49	$	
[20]	R.P.Kerr	(1963)	Gravitational	Field	of	a	Spinning	Body	as	an	Example	of	
Argebraic	Special	Metrics.	Phys.	Rev.Letters	11	;	237	
[21]	J	Droste	:	The	Field	of	a	Single	Centre	in	Einstein’s	Theory	of	Gravitation	and	
the	Motion	of	a	Particle	in	that	Field.	Royal	Netherland	Academy	of	Arts	and	
Sciences	(KNAW)	Proc.	19	I	,	Amsterdam	1917	pp.197-215.		
[22]	P.Koiran	:	Infall	Time	in	the		Eddington-Finkelstein	Metric,	with	Application	
do	Eddigton-Rosen	Bridges.		Inter.	Jr.	of	Mod.	Phys.	D,	14	aug.	2021,		to	be	
published.		https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05938	

	

69	
[23]	A.Eddington	:	A	Comparizon	of	Withehead’sand	Einstein’s	formulae.	Nature	
113-192,	1924	
[24]	D.Finkelstein	:	Past-Future	asymetry	of	the	gravitational	field	of	a	point	
particle.	Phys.	Rev.	110(4)	:	956-967,	1958	
[25]	S.Bondarenko	:	Negative	mass	Scenario	and	Schwarzschild	Spacetime	in	
General	Relativity.	Od.	Phys.	Lett.	A	Vol.34	n°11	(2019).	
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.07412.pdf	

