 

 

1 

A French academician who doesn't understand the Janus model 

 

2023 

 
     The  Janus  cosmological  model  represents  a  profound  change 
in  the  geometric 
representation  of  the  universe.  After  Einstein  it  was  described  it  as  a  "four-dimensional 
hypersurface". The Janus model extends this geometric vision by endowing this hypersurface 
with an "underside" where particles of negative energy and mass are located. Mathematically, 
this  implies  a  "bimetric"  description,  where  the  two  entities  interact,  hence  the  term 
"bigravity". 
 
     As it happens, the first person to propose a similar project was French academician Thibault 
Damour, in 2002.1.  
 

Thibault Damour, academician. 

 

 

 

      The articles, cited in the footnotes, are accompanied by an address from which they can 
be downloaded.  
 
     Damour and Kogan attempt to construct a “two-branes” theory, involving a spectrum of 
gravitons endowed with masses, but this 40-page paper ends up in a fishtail. In passing, they 
show that such bigravity must obey a system of two coupled field equations:  
 

 

1 T.Damour & I.I.Kogan : Effective Lagrangian and Universality classes of Nonlinear Bigravity. 
Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002). http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2002-Damour-Kogan-
bigravity.pdf 
 

 

 

2 

     Six years later, German Sabine Hossenfelder2 (who has now become a science blogger) 
takes  a  more  precise  approach.  This  time,  it's  a  question  of  conferring  an  identity  on  the 
inhabitants  of  this  second  fold  of  universe,  in  the  form  of  negative  masses.  In  1957, 
cosmologist  Hermann  Bondi  attempted  to  introduce  these  masses  into  Albert  Einstein's 
model3.    But  the  so-called  runaway  phenomenon  (see  the  album)  brings  to  light  physical 
contradictions so that the model contradicts fundamental principles of physics, such as the 
action-reaction principle and equivalence.  Sabine Hossenfelder also constructs her system of 
two coupled field equations:  
 

 
     But  she  can't  get  rid  of  the  discrepancy  with  physical  principles.  Believing  that  this  is 
inexorably linked to bigravity, she gives up..  
 
     In  2014  we  published  a  first  exact  solution  of  our  system  of  coupled  field  equations, 
physically and mathematically consistent, but which limits the solutions to a description of a 
homogeneous, unsteady isotropic universe. 

 

 

 

 

     Mathematical consistency translates into a generalized conservation of energy. The exact 
solution derived from the equations shows that the "dark energy" driving the acceleration of 
cosmic expansion is none other than that of negative mass, which is in the majority.    
 
    In 2018 Gilles d'Agostini exploited this exact solution and showed that the model, christened 
Janus, perfectly accounts for the data from type Ia supernovae, which earned S.Perlmutter , 
A.G. Riess and Schmidt the Nobel Prize for showing that the expansion of the universe, far 
from slowing down, was actually accelerating. Here's how G.D'Agostini's curve fits perfectly 
with the observational data:  
 

 

2 S. Hossenfelder : A bimetric Theory with Exchange symmetry Phys. Rev. D78, 044015, 2008 
and arXiv : 0807.2838v1 (gr-qc)17 july 2008. http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2008-
Hossenfelder.pdf 
3 H. Bondi: Negative mass in General Relativity : Negative mass in General Relativity. Rev. of 
Mod. Phys., Vol 29, N°3, july1957 

 

3 

 

 
      The mathematical consistency of the system of coupled field equations dictates that the 
terms of both members of the equations must have zero covariant derivatives. This applies to 
their first members, by construction. In physical terms, this translates into the satisfaction of 
conservation equations.  
 
        Einstein's equation provides only two types of solutions. 
 
     First,  there  are  unsteady  solutions  under  conditions  of  isotropy  and  homogeneity. 
Satisfaction of the condition translates into conservation of energy. We have seen that the 
same applies to the Janus equations. In the second article of 20144 the extension had been 
operated with two different light speeds.  
 
       The  second  set  of  solutions  refers  to  stationarity  (invariance  by  temporal  translation), 
combined  with  assumptions  of  spatial  symmetry.  As  in  Einstein's  model,  the  Newtonian 
approximation provides the 1/r2 law and the sign of the forces. The forces deduced from the 
Janus  equations  (see  comic  strip)  are  in  line  with  the  principles  of  action-reaction  and 
equivalence. The mathematical consistency of the equations in vacuum poses no problem, 
since both second members are zero. 

     But  in  2014,  at  the  model  development  stage,  it  was  not  possible  to  determine  the 
geometry inside the masses. Indeed, the equation translating the physical and mathematical 
coherence in this region of space simply translates into the fact that the forces of gravity 

 

 

4 J.P.Petit, G.D’Agostini : Cosmological Bimetric model with interacting positive and negative 
masses and two different speeds of light, in agreement with the observed acceleration of 
the Universe. Modern Physics LettersA, Vol.29 ; N° 34, 2014 ; Nov 10th 
http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2014-ModPhysLettA.pdf 
 

 

4 

within  the  masses  must  be  balanced  by  the  forces  of  pressure.  During  2018,  we  finally 
succeeded in this project and were in dialogue with a peer-reviewed journal to publish a first 
result, limited to the conditions of the Newtonian approximation, which represents 99% of 
astrophysical phenomena. The article5 will be published in the early days of January 2019. 
 
     At the same time, French academician Thibault Damour, considered the country's foremost 
expert on cosmology, published an article entitled 6 « About the so-called Janus Cosmological 
Model” in his page on the website of the Institut des Hautes Études to which he belongs, the 
French equivalent of the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton, USA. He also sent me a 
registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt, announcing the publication of an article 
which, in his opinion, put an end to what he considered to be ramblings. 
 
     Flabbergasted,  we  immediately  replied,  telling  him  that  we'd  just  solved  the  problem 
through an article, a copy of which we sent him, and proposing a meeting.  

 

 

No reply. 
 
    Months and years go by without Mr Damour replying to any of our messages. In 2022, 
november 11, three years after Mr. Damour's article went on line, a letter, co-signed by fellow 
scientists  who  had  themselves  verified  the  accuracy  of  our  calculations,  was  sent  to  him, 
asking for his reaction. 
 
     The reaction was immediate. On December 12, 2022, he published a second article on the 
IHES website, a veritable act of authority, entitled :  
 

Physical and mathematical inconsistency of the Janus cosmological model.7 

 
     He then bases this new article on the fact that in the Janus model "negative masses attract 
each other, whereas it is well known that they repel each other". He thus demonstrates that 
he hasn't actually read our articles, and bases his argument on Herman Bondi's result from 
1950. In the Einsteinian model, indeed, these negative masses repel each other. But in the 
Janus model, they attract. But there's none so deaf as those who don't want to understand.  

     It's easy to deduce the direction of the forces by constructing geodesics in a vacuum. The 
result is : 
 

 

5  J.P.Petit,  G.  D’Agostini,  N.Debergh :  Physical  and  mathematical  consistency  of  the  Janus 
Cosmological  Model  (JCM).  Progress  in  Physics  2019  Vol.15  issue  1.  http://www.jp-
petit.org/papers/cosmo/2019-Progress-in-Physics-1.pdf 
6 http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2019-Damour-IHES-eng.pdf 
7 http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2022-12-12-Damour-IHES.pdf 
 

 

 
 

5 

 

	

Fig.1 : Positive masses attract each other 

 
 

	

Fig.2	:	Negative masses attract each other	

 
 
      This shows that in three years, Damour simply hasn't read the articles we've published. In 
particular, he has failed to grasp the importance of the minus sign in front of the second 
member  of  the  second  field  equation,  highlighted  in  red  below,  which  re-establishes  the 
principles  of  action-reaction  and  equivalence,  and  makes  the  unmanageable  runway 
phenomenon disappear. 

 																																																						R(")$%−12	R"δ$%=χ3T(")$%+6g&g"	T7(&)$%8 
 																																																		R(&)$%−12	R&δ$%=−χ36g"g&	T7(")$%+T(&)$%8 

 
 
     On December 14, 2022, we immediately pointed out his error. 8.  

8 http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2022-12-14-to-Damour.pdf 

 

6 

 

 

 
     He then abandons this criticism and replaces this second article with a third one 9, posted 
on December 18, 2022, still on his IHES page, and expands on the alleged impossibility of 
integrating the neutron star model.  
 
    But here again, this last criticism doesn't hold water.  

 

    There is no need to explain the form of the "interaction tensors": 

 

     All we need to do is specify that their respective divergences must be zero. This is what 
Damour  says  in  his  2002  article.  But  he  doesn't  go  further.  In  fact,  it  is  this  condition  of 
compatibility and coherence that dictates the form of these two tensors. At this point, we 
should remember that general relativity, which translates into cosmic geometry being based 
on Albert Einstein's field equation, is in fact based on only two types of solution:  
 
-  Unsteady  solutions  (invariance  of  the  solution  by  time  translation)  with  isotropy  and 
homogeneity.  
 
- Stationary solutions with invariance under the action of the SO(3) (spherical symmetry) and 
SO(2) (axisymmetry) groups. 
   
   For the moment, the axisymmetric, SO(2)-invariant stationary solution of Einstein's equation 
can be expressed by the Kerr exterior metric  10 (1963) (describing geometry in a vacuum, 
outside a field-creating mass). This solution should logically be completed by its complement, 
the solution expressed in the form of an internal metric. But this has never been produced. 
The  Janus  equations  provide  the  joint  exterior  metrics,  two-folds  extensions  of  this  Kerr 
exterior metric. As these solutions are derived from the equations without a second member, 
their  mathematical  consistency  follows  automatically.  The  system  must  therefore  be 
physically and mathematically consistent in both configurations;  
 
-  Unsteady  solutions  (invariance  of  the  solution  by  time  translation)  with  isotropy  and 
homogeneity.  
 
- Stationary solutions with invariance under the action of SO(3) groups (spherical symmetry).  
 
    The  question  has  been  solved  in  the  first  case  with  our  2014,2015,  2018  papers.  The 
compatibility equation then translates into the generalized conservation of energy: 
 

E = r(+)c(+)2a(+)3 + r(-)c(-)2a(-)3  = Cst 

 

9http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2022-12-28-Damour-IHES.pdf 
10 R.Kerr : Gravitational field of a spinning mass as an example of algebraic special metrics. 
Physical Review Letters Vol. 11#5 1963 set. 1st. http://www.jp-
petit.org/papers/cosmo/1963-Kerr.pdf 
 

 

7 

      In the second case, as Damour agrees in the article posted on his page of the IHES website 
on December 28, 2022, these conditions are also fulfilled in the Newtonian approximation 
(low curvature, low velocities ahead of the speed of light).  
 
    This includes the geometric description of the region of space corresponding to the Great 
Repeller phenomenon, both inside and outside this object. The geodesics followed by positive-
energy  photons  (which  alone  lend  themselves  to  confrontation  with  observation)  can  be 
deduced from the pair of inner and outer Schwarzschild metrics generated by a negative-mass 
source.  
 
     This left us with the problem of describing the geometry inside a neutron star, which is 
based on this Newtonian approximation. Everything that could be done in this direction was 
fully described in Karl Schwarzschild's two papers of 1916. The first describes the geometry 
outside a mass.11  
 
     A month later, he published a paper describing the geometry inside the mass 12. Thi paper 
was  not  available  in  English  until  1999,  so  some  scientists  who  claim  to  be  experts  in 
cosmology are unaware of its existence. 
 
     Three authors have given their names to the so-called TOV equation of state (Tolman 13-
Oppenheimer-Volkoff14)  which  is  simply  a  reformulation  of  the  1916  solution  in  another 
coordinate system.  
 
     This  can  be  reconciled  as  a  solution  of  the  Janus  system,  based  on  the  fact  that  these 
neutron stars are automatically located (positive and negative masses are mutually exclusive) 
in a region where negative mass is practically absent, and the system is reduced to equation 

 

R µ
( + )ν −
 

1
2

R ( + )δµ

ν = χ T µ

( + )ν

	

 

to  Einstein 

field  of  a  mass  point  according 

11 K.Schwarzschild : Über das Gravitationsfeld Messenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen 
Theorie. Sit. Deut. Akad. Wiss. 1916. English translation by S.Antoci and A.Loinger. On 
the  gravitational 
theory. 
arXiv :physics/9912033v1 [physics.hist-ph] 16 dec 1999 
http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/1916-Schwarzschild-exterior-en.pdf 
 
12  K.Schwarzschild  :  Über  das  Gravitionalsfeld  einer  Kugel  Aus  incompressibler 
Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie. Sitzung der phys. Math. Klasse v.23 märz 1916. 
On 
theory. 
arXiv :physics/9912033v1 
 [physics.hist-ph] 
dec 
16 
Schwarzschild-interior-en.pdf 
 
13 http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/1939-Tolman.pdf 
 
14 http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/1939-Oppenheimer-Volkoff.pdf  

http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/1916-

field  of  a  mass  point  according 

the  gravitational 

to  Einstein 

1999. 

 

8 

						This	equation	is	nothing	but	Einstein's	equation,	in	mixed	notations,	which	explains	in	
particular	why	the	Janus	model	satisfies	all	local	relativistic	data	(perigee	advance	of	
planetary	orbits,	deviations	of	light	rays	by	masses).			
	A	technically	more	detailed	description	can	be	found	in	the	reply	to	T.Damour,	in	French15.  

 
 
Conclusion :  
 
     The challenge introduced by the Janus model is obviously a major one. It involves adopting 
a geometrical extension of general relativity, replacing the Einstein equation with the system 
of two coupled field equations of the Janus model: 

																																							R(")$%	−	12	R(")g(")$%	=	𝜒			)	T(")$%+	,g(&)g(")	T-(&)$%	. 
																																									R(-)$%	−	12	R(-)g(-)$%	=	-	𝜒			)	T(-)$%+	,g(")g(-)	T-"$%	. 

 

 

 

 

     On such an important issue, it is totally anomalous that the French academician Thibault 
Damour should have contented himself, in the form of an act of authority, with publishing on 
the website of the institute to which he belongs two articles entitled:  
 

Physical and mathematical inconsistency of the Janus model 

 
Instead of publishing this criticism in due form in a peer-reviewed journal, which would have 
been  an  ethical  response.  On  the  contrary,  he  refused  any  exchange,  any  debate,  any 
legitimate expression of a scientific right of reply. 
 
 

J.P.Petit    2023 

 

15http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/2023-Refutation-critiques-Damour.pdf 
  
  
 

