Nature of the Dipole Repeller
Hasnae Zejli, Jean-Pierre Petit, Hicham Zejli

To cite this version:
Hasnae Zejli, Jean-Pierre Petit, Hicham Zejli. Nature of the Dipole Repeller. Russian Journal of
Earth Science, In press, 2. ￿hal-04068080￿

HAL Id: hal-04068080

https://hal.science/hal-04068080

Submitted on 13 Apr 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Copyright

  
  

Nature of the Dipole Repeller  

____________________________________________________________________________ 
Hasnae ZEJLI - PhD in Physics & Mechanical Engineering, Hicham ZEJLI – Engineer,  

Jean-Pierre Petit - Astrophysicist & Retired Research Director at CNRS 

  

  
  

  
1 – Introduction 

Keywords : dipole repeller, primeval antimatter, dark matter, dark energy, runaway 
paradox, Sakharov model, bimetric model, negative mass, Janus cosmological model 
Abstract : It's shown through the Janus cosmological model framework that the object 
responsible for the phenomenon called "dipole repeller" is a spheroidal cluster made 
exclusively with anti-hydrogen and anti-helium of dark matter of negative mass. Emitting 
photons of negative energy, this object is not observable with optical instruments, but it 
plays a crucial role in the structure of the world of negative dark matters which contains 
neither galaxies, nor stars, nor heavy elements, nor planets, nor biomolecules. This model 
thus proposes an important extension of the theory of dark matter by including the existence 
of negative masses in the universe, and thus opens up new perspectives for understanding 
the structure and evolution of the universe as a whole. 
  In 2017 Yehudi Hoffman, B. Tully, H.Courtois and D.Pomarède published the first very large 
scale map of the universe (Hoffman et al. 2017), based not only on the position of galaxies, 
but also including the velocity field, subtracting the Hubble field from what emanated from 
the raw measurements of their redshift. The result is extremely impressive and will be, we 
believe, one of the major discoveries of observational cosmology today, comparable to that 
made by Edwin Hubble a century earlier. It was already known that the motions of a certain 
set of galaxies reflected a convergence toward a formation that had been given the name of 
Great Attractor. The analysis published in 2017 highlighted the action of another, larger 
formation, located beyond this one, to which the name Shapley Attractor was given. But the 
most singular result was to highlight a region, roughly diametrically opposed to these two 
formations, where no galaxies were found, only a large  void around which the neighboring 
galaxies presented a flight motion, centered on this object. This formation was first given the 
name of dipole repeller. Then, deciding to couple it to the attractive formations, it was 
included in the name of Dipole Attractor. There is no doubt that the understanding of such a 
phenomenon, which cannot be qualified as an artifact, will require an important progress in 
our understanding of cosmic dynamics. 
  Four years after this discovery, few attempts have been made to  model  this phenomenon. 
The article published by Neiser in 2020 does not focus on this question of the dipole repeller 
which follows from the hypotheses made. It is known that observations have highlighted a 
phenomenon of acceleration of the cosmic expansion (Perlmutter et al. 1999, Riess et al. 
2004, Schmidt B.P. et al. 1998). This implies the action of a component associated with a 

  
2 – Some attempts at interpretation. 

negative pressure. One  of  the models considered is to suppose the existence, within the 
cosmos, of elements of  negative mass, which would then exert a repulsive action on the 
components of positive mass. This hypothesis is at the center of the works corresponding to 
the references (Petit et al. 2014b, Petit et al. 2014a, Petit et al. 2019, Petit et al. 2018, Petit et 
al. 2021b, Petit et al. 2021a). Neiser in 2020 makes numerous hypotheses in different fields, 
on the nature of the Big Bang, the quantum vacuum, the origin of the universe "which would 
have been created by the gravitational collapse of  an  antineutrino star". To the point that 
he recalls that the conclusions of his article remain speculative. Among these hypotheses is 
that antimatter would have a negative gravitational mass, which would allow, according to 
him, "the progressive formation of neutrino stars and stars made up of antineutrinos which 
would repel each other". This repulsive aspect of a primordial antimatter is also mentioned 
by Benoit-Lévy et al. in 2012, but without further justification. All these people are waiting 
for the result of the analysis of the behavior of the antimatter created in the LHC, slowed 
down and subjected to the earth gravitational field (Nieto et al. 1994), aspects discussed by 
Nieto et al. in 1991. This is a question that we will address later. Heald evokes in 2020 the 
situation of Laniakea, pushed by the dipole repeller and pulled by the Shapley Attractor. Here 
again, a repulsion between matter and antimatter is evoked, which would have given rise to 
the present large-scale structure of the universe, organized around large voids. But we do 
not find any real model of the object that would be located at the center of this great void, 
nor why we would not receive any light signal from it. Vuyk appeals in 2018 to a hypothetical 
5th force. Hoffman et al. in 2018 through numerical simulations reconstruct the ad hoc 
distribution of dark matter consistent with the observational data (Hoffman et al. 2017). 
From this exploration we retain  two explanatory schemes. That of the existence of 
hypothetical objects made of  repulsive antimatter, unobservable and that of a gap in the 
dark matter distribution. 
  One is entitled to ask the question: can a gap in the dark matter produce the observed 
repulsion effect? Conceptually one is then tempted to start by considering a spherical gap in 
a uniform dark matter distribution. We then think that this system should obey the Poisson 
equation. 
(1)                                               
This equation is linear. We can therefore say that by superimposing two given density 
distributions ρ1 and ρ2 , the resulting gravitational potential is the sum of the potentials 
associated 
with 
these 
two 
 . 
, creating a potential Ψ1. We will create 
  Let us consider a uniform density distribution 
the gap by assuming that in a certain volume contained in a sphere we superimpose an equal 
and opposite density 
creating a potential ψ2 . 
 Let us start by calculating this one, solution of 

  
3 – About the interpretation through a gap in the dark matter. 

distributions 

 

 

 

 

 

is 

Its 

the 

(1). 

solution 

equation 

(2)                                              
This solution is : 
(3)                              
We thus obtain a repulsive gravitational field, proportional to the distance to the center of 
the sphere. It remains to calculate the gravitational field created by the uniform distribution, 
still 
considering 
then 
: 
Poisson 
(4)                                  
We obtain the same force field, of opposite sign. Consequently, by superimposing, inside the 
gap the gravitational field is null:   
(5)                                                            
In any case the solution (4), of the Poisson equation, corresponding to a uniform distribution 
is a paradox. We have placed ourselves in a stationary or quasi-stationary situation, 
considering a uniform distribution of density 
. Then, whatever the point chosen as the 
origin of the coordinates, we find a non-zero gravitational field 
 , whose modulus increases 
the  distance 
proportionally 
faced  with  a paradox. 
to 
this  point.  We  are 
to 
 We  are 
the  construction  of 
to 
forced 
this  Poisson  equation. 
to  go  back 
Unlike electromagnetism, this equation cannot be constructed by calculating the flow of 
the gravitational field through a closed surface, because of the non-nullity at infinity. 
In gravitation we will be forced to consider the Poisson equation as the linearized version of 
Einstein's equation in a very restrictive case: in a stationary (or quasi-stationary) situation 
and when we can describe the metric as a perturbation of a Lorentz metric : 
 (6)                                                              
The classical calculation gives : 
(7)                                                           
The gravitational potential is thus defined by: 

 

 

 

4 – The dipole repeller in the Janus cosmological model. 

(8)                                                                 
 and equation (7) is then identified with the Poisson equation. But, in this approach, it should 
be noted that everything is based on the fact that we can consider a stationary metric 
solution, in the zero order, expressed in the form of a Lorentz metric, immediately associated 
to a portion of empty space. In the above, the perturbation of the metric is due to a density 
of finite extension. It is not possible to reconcile this approach on the basis of a non-empty, 
uniform and infinite density of order zero. The conclusion is that it is simply impossible to 
define a gravitational potential in a uniform matter distribution. One can consider that this 
remark is of little interest. It remains that this question had never been raised before. 
However, the problem of the existence of large voids in the large scale structure of the 
universe is not solved. Indeed, the gravitational instability produces clusters, not vacuums, 
so that we do not have a scheme for their formation. 
This translates into an introduction of negative masses in the cosmological model 
is 
that satisfies  the  equivalence  principle.  This 
in  the  framework  of 
classical general relativity, based on a single field equation, that of Einstein, with or without 
its cosmological constant: 
(9)                                                  
Indeed the control particles, positive or negative, follow the same geodesics, whatever the 
source of the field. As a consequence, we get the following interaction scheme: 
•  The positive masses attract the positive and negative masses. 
•  The negative masses repel the positive and negative masses. 
This leads to the runaway paradox (see Fig. 1), according to which a couple constituted by 
masses of opposite signs accelerates uniformly while keeping a constant kinetic energy. 

impossible 

 

 

When the authors Neiser in 2020, Benoit-Lévy et al. in 2012 and Nieto et al. in 1994 mention 
the existence of negative mass structures, these aspects are not considered, although they 
are fundamental. It is not possible to invoke the presence of negative masses without 
clarifying this point. In 2018, Farnes justifies what he calls himself a "toy model" by saying 
that this runaway effect could be the source of cosmic rays. To remain within the framework 
of a description using a single field equation, he is forced to invoke a hypothetical mechanism 
of continuous creation of negative mass so that this leads to the constancy of its value over 
time, which would then constitute an interpretation of the presence of the cosmological 
constant in the equation. But this scheme does not exclude the runway phenomenon which 
he then considers as the source of the existence of particles of very high energy, so-called 
cosmic rays. Because of this undescribed mechanism of constant creation of negative mass 
the author only obscures the situation even more. 
The Janus cosmological model (Petit et al. 2014b, Petit et al. 2014a, Petit et al. 2019, Petit et 
al. 2018, Petit et al. 2021b, Petit et al. 2021a) takes up the idea of a bimetric description of 
the universe, initiated by Damour et al. in 2002, then taken up through articles published by 
Hossenfelder in 2006 and 2008. If the description done by Damour et al. in 2002 corresponds 
to branes whose points are connected by a hypothetical force field, the description done next 
by  Hossenfelder in 2006 and 2008 is clearer and more constructed, geometrically. The 
system of the two field equations resulting from their construction, from a Lagrangian, 
satisfies the Bianchi conditions. The universe is then an M4 manifold equipped with two 
metrics, the first one producing the geodesics along which the positive masses and the 
positive energy photons move and the second one the geodesics along which the negative 
mass particles and the negative energy photons move. The disjoint character of these two 
systems of geodesics leads to the fact that each set of masses interacts with the other only 
through an antigravity force and that the negative masses are therefore invisible for an 
observer constituted of positive masses. The model was created by Hossenfelder in 2006 and 
2008 at a time when the phenomenon of accelerating cosmic expansion was not recognized. 
In an effort to fit with what she considers as the standard model (of Friedmann) the author 
makes choices of signs which lead to a nonsatisfaction of the principle of equivalence for the 
negative masses, which are then endowed with a negative gravitational mass, but a positive 

inertial mass. In the Janus model, on the contrary, we try to satisfy the equivalence principle 
within the two populations, which leads to the system of equations: 

The tensors 
 and
correspond to “induced geometry”, i.e. the way each population 
contributes to the geometry of the other. Their form is determined by the Bianchi conditions. 
In their mixed form : 

 

 

These geometrical conditions are only problematic in regions where the densities of matter, 
of positive or negative mass, are non-zero. By explaining these conditions, in the conditions 
of the Newtonian approximation they simply translate the fact that inside these masses, 
where the density is assumed to be constant, the pressure force balances the gravity force. 
Outside these regions it is the vacuum. The second members are zero and the 
Bianchi conditions are satisfied identically because of the form of the first members, 
themselves resulting from the presence of the terms 
 in action as 
first introduced by Damour et al. in 2002. The Janus model is based on a set of agreements 
with observation. What interests us here is a possible justification of the Great Repeller 
phenomenon. In its Newtonian approximation the system of the two coupled field equations 
leads to the following interaction laws: 

 and 

•  Masses of the same sign attract each other according to Newton's law 
•  Masses of opposite signs repel each other according to "anti-Newton" 
The runaway phenomenon is thus eliminated and the principle of equivalence is satisfied in 
both populations. For negative masses, their gravitational masses and their inertial masses 
are negative and equal. It is then possible to do numerical simulations. If the absolute values 
of the two densities ρ(+) > 0 and ρ(−) < 0 the values of the thermal agitation velocities <V(+) 
> = <V(−) > are equal we obtain a percolation, which does not fit with the observational data 
referring to the large scale structure of the universe (see Fig. 2). 

On the other hand, if we assume that there is a strong dissymmetry between the 
two populations, so that ρ(−) >> ρ(+) then the pattern changes completely. As the 
Jeans times vary as the inverse of the square root of the density, the negative masses 
are shorter. These then form a regular network of spheroidal conglomerates. The 
positive mass is forced to occupy the remaining space, which gives it a lacunar structure (El-
Ad et al. 1997) comparable to a set of joined bubbles (see Fig. 3), a pattern repeated by 
Farnes in 2018. 

 

On Fig. 4, there is the result of a 2D simulation (Petit 1995) : 

 

 

Teams with adequate means will easily extend this to 3D. As developed by Petit et al. through 
articles referenced in 2014b, 2021b, 2021a, the negative mass content accounts for both the 
dark matter and the dark energy, which is identified with the contribution 
 and 
is therefore responsible for the acceleration of the expansion of positive masses. According 
to this model, the phenomenon of the dipole repeller translates the presence, within this 
great void, of a spheroidal conglomerate of negative mass, invisible, because it emits 
photons of negative energy that our eyes and our measuring instruments cannot capture. 

5 – Nature of the objects of negative masses 

 

This question has been examined by Petit et al. in 2014b and the detailed calculations can be 
found in the article published by Petit et al. in 2021a. In the theory of dynamical groups 
(Souriau 1970) the link between geometric structure and content is translated by the nature 
of the associated dynamical group. The General Relativity goes with the restricted Poincaré 
group, where we keep only the set of terms which do not reverse time. It is thus the 
orthochron subgroup of the complete Poincaré group, built from the orthochron Lorentz 
subgroup. Here after its matrix representation: 
(12)                                                                 
C being the space-time translation vector. It is a group of dimension 10. By making this group 
act on the dual of its Lie algebra, or momentum space, one makes appear the energy E, the 
momentum p and the spin s, as attributes of the particle, of purely geometric essence. In 
order to endow the particles with n quantum charges, it is necessary to endow the space with 
n additional dimensions {ζ0 , ζ1, ... , ζn} and move on to the group below, where we have 
included its action. 
(13)                                                           

 

 

The action on the momentum space adds to the particle n quantum numbers qi, including 
the electric charge, which are all constants. By introducing the group: 
(14)                                                  
We translate geometrically the concept of antimatter, the inversion of quantum charges (C-
symmetry) going hand in hand with the inversion of movements in additional dimensions. 
If we want to introduce negative energies, it is enough to pass from the restricted Poincaré 
group Lo, orthochronic, to the full group λLo with λ = ± 1 . Immediately we find that the time-
inversion ( λ = − 1) goes with energy and mass-inversion. The corresponding dynamic group 
is according to the article published by Petit et al. in 2014b : 

 

 

6 – About the lack of observation of primordial antimatter. 

(15)                                             
In this model the C-symmetry exists both in the world of positive and negative masses. There 
are thus two antimatter. 
•  The first one, C-symmetric ( λ = 1; μ = −1) of the ordinary matter, of positive mass 
•  The second, PT-symmetric ( λ = −1; μ = 1) of ordinary matter, of negative mass. 
It is the first one that we make appear in laboratory. The model therefore predicts that this 
one will behave like ordinary matter in the earth's gravity field. 
If we suppose, as A. Sakharov (1967, 1979, 1980), that the couple : 
•  Matter of positive mass 
•  Antimatter of positive mass 
is formed from quarks and antiquarks of positive energy, and that a couple : 
•  Matter of negative mass 
•  Antimatter of negative mass 
was formed from quarks and antiquarks of negative energy, and that in addition 
the synthesis of the matter of positive mass, in the first couple, was faster, whereas it is 
that of the antimatter of negative mass, in the second couple which was it one leads on 
the idea that the objects, in the center of the great voids of the large-scale structure of 
the universe, whose presence is betrayed by the phenomenon of the dipole repeller, 
would be constituted of antimatter, that is to say of antiprotons, anti-neutrons and 
antielectrons of negative mass. These would then form spheroidal objects made of 
antihydrogen (light elements) of negative mass comparable to immense protostars with 
a cooling time superior to the age of the universe, which could not be the seat of 
fusion reaction, thus generating neither stars, nor galaxies, nor planets. 
As presented by Petit in 1995, these negative mass objects decrease the luminosity of 
the background sources by negative lensing. But the luminosities of galaxies at z > 7 
are indeed weak. The classical approach is to consider them as dwarfs. But these could 
be galaxies  of  normal  size  and  mass,  so  the 
luminosity  would  be  affected  by 
this phenomenon. Finer measurements, in large voids, could reveal a threshold that 
would allow access to the diameter of these formations. 

7 – Observations specifically related to these objects. 

8 – Conclusion. 

References 

Data availability  

We have examined the very few attempts to model the dipole repeller phenomenon. Then 
we have moved on to the interpretation of the Janus cosmological model. We recall the origin 
and the essential aspects of this model, based on the hypothesis that the universe has a 
content of negative masses, such that the principle of equivalence is satisfied in both 
populations and that eliminates the runaway phenomenon and produces the same effects 
attributed so far to dark matter and dark energy. In this model the dominant negative mass 
forms a regular set of spheroidal clusters, which repel the positive mass by confining it in the 
residual space, giving it a lacunar structure. One of these can then produce the phenomenon 
of dipole repeller. 
The data underlying this article are included within the article and in its online 
supplementary material. 
Benoit-Lévy A., Chardin G., 2012, Introducing the Dirac-Milne universe, Astronomy and 
Astrophysics Vol. 537 A 78 
Damour T., Kogan I., 2002, Effective Lagrangians and universality classes of nonlinear 
bigravity, Phys. Rev. D Vol. 66, Iss. 10 
El-Ad H., Piran T., da Costa L.N., 1997, Mon. Not. R. Astro. Soc. 
Farnes J., 2018, A unifying theory of dark energy and dark matter : Negative mass and matter 
creation within a modified ΛCDM framework, Astronomy and Astrophysics 
Heald G., 2020, The Stronger Case for Gravitational Repulsion between Matter and 
Antimatter, Research Gate publication Num. 339339776 
Hoffman Y., Carlesi E., Pomarede D., Tully R.B., Courtois H., Gottlober S., Libeskind N.I., Sorce 
J.G.,  Yepes  G.,  2018,  The  quasi-linear  nearby  Universe,  Nature  Astronomy, 
arxiv:1807.03724.pdf 
Hoffman Y., Pomarède D., Tully R.B., Courtois H., 2017, The Dipole Repeller, Nature 
Astronomy 1.0036 
Hossenfelder S., 2006, Antigravitation, Phys Letters B Vol. 636 issue 2 
Hossenfelder S., 2008, A bimetric Theory with Exchange Symmetry, Phys. Rev. D78 044015, 
arXiv:0807.2838v1 

Neiser T.F., 2020, Fermi Degenerate Antineutrino Star Model of Dark Energy. Advances in 
Astronomy, Volume 2020, Article ID 8654307 
Nieto M.M., Goldman T., Anderson J.D., Lau E.L., Mercader J.P., 1994, Theoretical motivation 
for  gravitation  experiments  on  ultra-low  energy  antiprotons  and  antihydrogen, 
arxiv:9412234.pdf 
Nieto M.M., Goldman T., 1991, The arguments against “antigravity” and the gravitational 
acceleration of antimatter, Physics Reports Vol. 205 Issue. 5, p. 221-281 
Perlmutter S. et al., 1999, Measurements of Ω and Λ from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae, APJ, 
Vol. 517 Number. 2 
Petit J.P., 1995, Twin Universe Cosmology, Astrophysics and Space Science Volume 226 Issue 
2 pp.273-307 
Petit J.P., D’Agostini G., 2014a, Cosmological Bimetric model with interacting positive and 
negative masses and two different speeds of light, in agreement with the observed 
acceleration of the Universe, Modern Physics Letters A Vol. 29 Number. 34 
Petit J.P., D’Agostini G., 2014b, Negative Mass hypothesis in cosmology and the nature of dark 
energy, Astrophysics And Space Science, A 354, pp. 611-615 
Petit J.P., D’Agostini G., Debergh N., 2018, Evidence of negative energies and masses in the 
Dirac equation through a unitary time-reversal operator, J. Phys. Comm. 2 Number. 115012 
Petit J.P., D’Agostini G., Debergh N., 2019, Physical and mathematical consistency of the Janus 
Cosmological Model (JCM), Progress in Physics 2019 Vol. 15 issue. 1 
Petit J.P., D’Agostini G., Debergh N., 2021a, Bimetric models. When negative mass replaces 
both dark matter and dark energy. Excellent agreement with observational data. Solving the 
problem of the primeval antimatter, Database of the French National Center 
Petit J.P., D’Agostini G., 2021b, Constraints on Janus Cosmological model from recent 
observations of supernovae type Ia, Astrophysics and Space Science, In press. hal-03426721f 
Riess A. et al., 2004, Type Ia Supernova Discoveries at z > 1 from the Hubble Space Telescope, 
Evidence for Past Deceleration and Constraints on Dark Energy Evolution, APJ Vol. 607 
Number. 2 
Sakharov A.D., 1967, ZhETF Pis’ma 5 : 32, JETP Lett. 5 : 24 
Sakharov A.D., 1979, ZhETF Pis’ma 76 : 1172, JETP 49 : 594 
Sakharov A.D., 1980, Cosmological Model of the Universe with a Time Vector Inversion, 
ZhETF Tr. JETP 52, 349-351, 79 : 689–693 

Schmidt B.P. et al., 1998, The high-Z supernova search. Measuring cosmic deceleration and 
global curvature of the universe using type Ia supernovae, APJ, Vol. 507 Number. 1 
Souriau J.M., 1970, Structure des systèmes dynamiques, Dunod Ed. France, 1997, Structure 
of Dynamical Systems, Boston Birkhaüser Ed. 
Vuyk V., 2018, A Fifth Force Vacuum Dipole Repeller, Needed to Create all Attraction Forces 
even around Black Holes in Quantum FFF Theory, Research Gate publication Num. 
325995732 

