Draft version November 17, 2023
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

First Sagittarius A* Event Horizon Telescope Results. I. The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole

in the Center of the Milky Way

The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration

3
2
0
2

 

v
o
N
6
1

 

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
0
8
6
8
0

.

1
1
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

We present the first Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) observations of Sagittarius A* (Sgr A∗), the
Galactic center source associated with a supermassive black hole. These observations were conducted
in 2017 using a global interferometric array of eight telescopes operating at a wavelength of λ = 1.3 mm.
The EHT data resolve a compact emission region with intrahour variability. A variety of imaging and
modeling analyses all support an image that is dominated by a bright, thick ring with a diameter of
51.8 ± 2.3 µas (68% credible interval). The ring has modest azimuthal brightness asymmetry and a
comparatively dim interior. Using a large suite of numerical simulations, we demonstrate that the
EHT images of Sgr A∗ are consistent with the expected appearance of a Kerr black hole with mass
∼4 × 106 M⊙, which is inferred to exist at this location based on previous infrared observations of
individual stellar orbits as well as maser proper motion studies. Our model comparisons disfavor
scenarios where the black hole is viewed at high inclination (i > 50◦), as well as non-spinning black
holes and those with retrograde accretion disks. Our results provide direct evidence for the presence
of a supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, and for the first time we connect
the predictions from dynamical measurements of stellar orbits on scales of 103 − 105 gravitational radii
to event horizon-scale images and variability. Furthermore, a comparison with the EHT results for the
supermassive black hole M87∗ shows consistency with the predictions of general relativity spanning
over three orders of magnitude in central mass.

Keywords: galaxies: individual: Sgr A∗– Galaxy: center – black hole physics – techniques: high angular

resolution – techniques: interferometric

1. INTRODUCTION

Black holes are among the boldest and most profound
predictions of Einstein’s theory of General Relativity
(GR; Einstein 1915). Originally studied as a mathemati-
cal consequence of GR rather than as physically relevant
objects (Schwarzschild 1916), they are now believed to
be generic and sometimes inevitable outcomes of gravi-
tational collapse (Oppenheimer & Snyder 1939; Penrose
1965). In GR, the spacetime around astrophysical black
holes is predicted to be uniquely described by the Kerr
metric, which is entirely specified by the black hole’s
mass and angular momentum or “spin” (Kerr 1963).

The first empirical evidence for their existence was
through stellar-mass black holes, beginning with obser-
vations of X-ray binary orbits (Bolton 1972; Webster &
Murdin 1972; McClintock & Remillard 1986) and cul-
minating in the detection of gravitational waves from
merging stellar-mass black holes (Abbott et al. 2016).
In parallel, the discovery that quasars are not stellar in
nature but are rather extremely luminous, compact ob-
jects located in the centers of distant galaxies (Schmidt
1963) led to an intensive effort to identify and measure
the supermassive black holes (SMBHs) energetically fa-

vored to power them (Lynden-Bell 1969). Observations
now suggest that SMBHs not only lie at the center of
nearly every galaxy (Richstone et al. 1998) but also may
play a role in their evolution (see, e.g., Magorrian et al.
1998; Fabian 2012; Kormendy & Ho 2013), though how
exactly the ebbs and flows of black hole activity and
growth proceed is a major outstanding question in the
field.

With the advent of the Event Horizon Telescope
(EHT), SMBHs can now be studied with direct imag-
ing (Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al.
2019a,b,c,d,e,f, 2021a,b, hereafter M87∗ Paper I-VIII).
The combination of an event horizon and strong lensing
near black holes is predicted to produce distinctive grav-
itational signatures in their images (e.g., Hilbert 1917;
Bardeen 1973; Luminet 1979; Jaroszynski & Kurpiewski
1997; Falcke et al. 2000). In particular, simulated im-
ages of black holes typically have a central brightness
depression encircled by a bright emission ring. The ring
usually lies near the gravitationally lensed photon orbits
that define the boundary of what we hereafter refer to
as the black hole “shadow.” The shadow has an angular
diameter dsh ≈ 10GM/(c2D) ≡ 10θg, where G is the

2

The EHT Collaboration et al.

gravitational constant, c is the speed of light, M is the
black hole mass, and D is the black hole distance.

From the first realization that SMBHs could power
bright radio cores in many galactic nuclei (Lynden-Bell
1969, and references therein), the search has been on
to identify them. Within our own galaxy, the compact
source Sgr A∗ has been intensely studied as a candi-
date SMBH since its discovery as a bright source of
radio emission located near the Galactic Center (Bal-
ick & Brown 1974; Ekers et al. 1975; Lo et al. 1975).
Decades of monitoring its proper motion, as well as of
motions of individual stars in orbit around it, have re-
vealed Sgr A∗ to be an extremely dense concentration
of mass (M ≈ 4 × 106M⊙) that is located at and nearly
motionless with respect to the dynamical center of the
Galaxy (D ≈ 8 kpc), providing strong evidence that it
is the nuclear SMBH in our Galaxy (e.g., Gravity Col-
laboration et al. 2019; Do et al. 2019; Reid & Brun-
thaler 2020). As the nearest supermassive black hole,
Sgr A∗ provides a unique opportunity to directly image
such an object, together with its accretion system, in the
most common, quiescent state of SMBHs across the Uni-
verse. It also provides the chance to elucidate some of
the drivers of observed cycles in accretion power and jet
launching, via comparison with the more “active” galac-
tic nucleus M87∗.
In this paper, we present the first EHT observations
of Sgr A∗ and put them into context with our previ-
ous results on M87∗.
In section 2, we describe what
was previously known about the physical properties of
Sgr A∗ and compare them to M87∗. We then summarize
our Sgr A∗ observations with the EHT and other obser-
vatories in section 3 and discuss its variability in sec-
tion 4. In section 5, we present the first EHT images of
Sgr A∗ and analyze its event-horizon-scale structure. In
section 6, we discuss the astrophysical interpretation of
these results using an extensive suite of general relativis-
tic magnetohydrodynamic (GRMHD) simulations, and
in section 7 we present the constraints that these results
give for GR and black hole alternatives. We provide the
overall conclusions and outlook in section 8. The five
companion papers of this series provide a more com-
prehensive discussion of all these topics (Event Horizon
Telescope Collaboration et al. 2022a,b,c,d,e, hereafter
Papers II-VI).

2. SGR A* AND M87*

Decades of observations have provided a picture of our
local SMBH that is unmatched in any other galaxy (for
details about the full spectrum, see Paper II). Sgr A∗
has been detected from long radio wavelengths (∼1 m)
to the hard X-ray band, excepting approximately 1 µm
to 1 nm due to extinction from dust in the galactic plane.
Sgr A∗ is remarkable for its feeble emission, producing a
bolometric luminosity of <∼1036 erg/s, only ∼100 times
that of the Sun. Were it located in another galaxy, it
would likely go undetected. Nevertheless, by observ-

ing its spectrum and variability, its environment, and
its influence on surrounding bodies, a great deal has
been learned about this source specifically, and about
the astrophysical processes that operate around super-
massive black holes.
In this section we describe how
we assembled our current knowledge of Sgr A∗, discuss
important theoretical uncertainties about its accretion
and outflows, and compare it with the other horizon-
scale EHT target, M87∗.

2.1. Properties of Sgr A*

The proximity of Sgr A∗ permits precise measure-
ments of its gravitating mass via the monitoring of re-
solved individual stellar orbits. High-resolution infrared
(IR) observations, using increasingly sophisticated in-
strumentation and analyses, have traced out the three
dimensional orbits of several stars within the innermost
arcsecond around Sgr A∗ (Schödel et al. 2002; Ghez et al.
2003, 2008; Gillessen et al. 2009; Gravity Collaboration
et al. 2018a; Do et al. 2019; Gravity Collaboration et al.
2019). These orbits jointly determine the mass and dis-
tance to Sgr A∗ to high precision, particularly the ratio
M/D that determines the angular size of the black hole
on the sky. As discussed in Paper II and Paper VI,
the current values for the mass and distance suggest
an angular shadow diameter close to 50 µas, compa-
rable to that of M87∗. The closest orbital periapses
confine the mass to within ∼1,000 Schwarzschild radii
(RS = 2GM/c2).
Radio observations of Sgr A∗ have provided a signif-
icant motivation for the development of the EHT ex-
periment. Sgr A∗ shows a flat/inverted radio spectrum,
which often arises from compact jet emission (Blandford
& Königl 1979) in other low-luminosity active galactic
nuclei (LLAGN; Ho 1999; Nagar et al. 2000). Such a
spectrum can, however, result from any stratified, self-
absorbed synchrotron source, where successively higher
frequencies are produced at increasingly smaller scales,
even without a jet (e.g., Narayan et al. 1995). Sgr A∗
shows an excess of millimeter emission above the flat
centimeter-wave spectrum, the so-called “submillimeter
bump,” that was inferred to indicate the presence of a
very compact emitting region at these wavelengths (e.g.,
Zylka et al. 1992; Falcke et al. 1998).
To clarify the nature of this source, the structure of
Sgr A∗ was investigated using very-long-baseline inter-
ferometry (VLBI) at progressively shorter wavelengths
(see Paper II, and references therein). For wavelengths
longer than several cm, the observed source size is en-
tirely determined by scatter-broadening in the ionized
interstellar medium, scaling with a wavelength depen-
dence of λ2. At wavelengths of 7 mm and shorter, the
imprint of the intrinsic structure of Sgr A∗ became dis-
cernible through the scattering (e.g., Rogers et al. 1994;
Lo et al. 1998; Doeleman et al. 2001; Bower et al. 2004;
Shen et al. 2005; Bower et al. 2006). The source grows
more compact at shorter wavelengths, as expected (e.g.,

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

3

Özel et al. 2000), though it does not present a clear jet
structure. For wavelengths as short as ∼1 mm, Sgr A∗
is only slightly blurred by scattering, and Falcke et al.
(2000) predicted that submillimeter VLBI could directly
image a brightness depression within this region related
to the black hole shadow.

In parallel with these developments and motivated by
the goal to study black holes, the capabilities of mm-
VLBI improved rapidly. At 1.4 mm, Padin et al. (1990)
reported the first VLBI fringes and Krichbaum et al.
(1998) obtained the first VLBI detections and associ-
ated source size measurements for Sgr A∗, each using a
2-element interferometer. Doeleman et al. (2008) ob-
served Sgr A∗ at 1.3 mm with a 3-element VLBI ar-
ray and reported the discovery of an intrinsic source
size comparable to the expected angular diameter of the
black hole shadow. These observations provided impor-
tant constraints for theoretical models (e.g., Broderick
et al. 2009; Dexter et al. 2009; Mościbrodzka et al. 2009)
and strongly suggested that 1.3 mm VLBI has a clear
view into the innermost region around the Sgr A∗ black
hole. Subsequent VLBI studies of Sgr A∗ at 1.3 mm
with progressively enhanced arrays revealed the com-
pact emission to be variable and significantly polarized,
with measured “closure phases” that are indicative of
persistent asymmetry in the image structure (Fish et al.
2011; Johnson et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2018).
Observations of Sgr A∗ outside the radio band were
important for completing the picture of this source as
an LLAGN. When X-ray and gamma-ray instruments
ROSAT and Sigma/GRANAT (Predehl & Truemper
1994; Goldwurm et al. 1994) could not identify a bright
central source, it became clear that Sgr A∗ must ei-
ther be obscured or anomalously faint compared to
other known LLAGN. The first identification of Sgr A∗
as a compact and variable source in the X-rays was
achieved with the Chandra X-ray Observatory (Chan-
dra) (Baganoff et al. 2001, 2003). This detection, to-
gether with the ∼4×106 M⊙ mass of Sgr A∗ determined
from stellar orbits, sets a maximum luminosity scale for
the source, the so-called Eddington luminosity,1 and the
X-ray measurements confirmed that Sgr A∗ is approxi-
mately 9 orders magnitude less luminous than its LEdd
— the lowest Eddington ratio (L/LEdd) observed for any
black hole.
This particularly faint high-energy emission stimu-
lated a lively debate regarding the nature of Sgr A∗’s
accretion/outflow properties, and motivated new theo-
retical developments.
If the emission primarily origi-
nates in the accretion inflow, either it must be excep-
tionally radiatively inefficient (Narayan et al. 1995), or

1 The Eddington luminosity is an idealized estimate of the
LEdd ≡
maximum power
4πGM cmp/σT ≈ 1038 (M/M⊙) erg/s, where σT is the Thom-
son cross section and mp is the mass of a proton.

for an accreting black hole:

the accretion rate onto the black hole must be very
small compared to what is captured, or possibly some
combination of the two (Blandford & Begelman 1999;
Narayan et al. 2000; Quataert & Gruzinov 2000a; Yuan
& Narayan 2014). Alternately the emission could be
dominated by an outflow, in which case a small accre-
tion rate would also be favored (Falcke et al. 1993), even
during flares (Markoff et al. 2001). Fortunately, the
proximity of Sgr A∗ enables unparalleled study of the
accretion flow. Observations with Chandra marginally
resolve thermal bremsstrahlung emission from near the
gas capture radius, leading to an estimate of the cap-
tured accretion rate of ∼10−6 − 10−5M⊙/yr at ∼105RS
(Quataert 2002; Baganoff et al. 2003). The source of this
gas can be connected to the observable stellar winds of
∼30 individual massive stars found in the inner parsec
(Coker et al. 1999; Russell et al. 2017; Ressler et al.
2020). The near-horizon accretion rate has also been
estimated to be 10−9 − 10−7 M⊙/yr through measure-
ments of the Faraday rotation of polarized millimeter
emission from Sgr A∗ (Bower et al. 2003; Marrone et al.
2006, 2007). This Faraday rotation is orders of magni-
tude smaller than would be expected if the accretion rate
at the gas capture radius persisted to small radii (Bower
et al. 1999; Agol 2000; Quataert & Gruzinov 2000b; Mar-
rone et al. 2006). This conclusion is further supported by
radially resolved X-ray spectroscopy (Wang et al. 2013)
suggesting that only ∼1% of the captured mass makes
it to the SMBH. Taken together, the low luminosity, low
radiative efficiency, and weak Faraday rotation are con-
sistent with a weakly bound, magnetized accretion flow
so diffuse that the electron and ion temperatures are
unable to remain strongly coupled.
Finally, Sgr A∗ exhibits flaring emission at most wave-
lengths, including continuous variability at millimeter
wavelengths.
In particular, approximately daily flares
are observed at X-ray and NIR wavelengths that are of-
ten (but not always) simultaneous (e.g., Eckart et al.
2004) and that change on timescales as short as min-
utes (e.g. Baganoff et al. 2001; Genzel et al. 2003).
These timescales suggest an origin from within ∼5RS
of the SMBH, which is consistent with astrometry of
NIR flares using the GRAVITY instrument on the Very
Large Telescope Interferometer (Gravity Collaboration
et al. 2018b).

2.2. Comparison to M87∗

M87∗ and Sgr A∗ have the largest angular sizes of
any known SMBHs, making them the primary EHT tar-
gets. However, they differ in several important ways.
First, they have substantially different luminosities and
accretion rates, both in absolute terms and when scaled
by mass. M87∗, roughly 1500× more massive (M =
(6.5 ± 0.7) × 109 M⊙; M87∗ Paper I), has an inferred
˙M ∼ 10−3 M⊙/yr and a bolometric lu-
accretion rate of
minosity of Lbol ≈ 1042 erg/s measured in 2017 (EHT
MWL Science Working Group et al. 2021). Estimates

4

The EHT Collaboration et al.

Figure 1. The 2017 EHT array as seen from Sgr A∗. The array included eight observatories at six locations: the ALMA
and the APEX on the Llano de Chajnantor in Chile, the LMT on Volcán Sierra Negra in Mexico, the JCMT and SMA on
Maunakea in Hawai’i, the Institut de Radioastronomie Millimétrique 30-m telescope (PV) on Pico Veleta in Spain, the SMT on
Mt. Graham in Arizona, and the SPT in Antarctica.

of the total kinetic power are typically ∼ 10− 100 times
larger, thus conservatively L/LEdd ≳ 10−5 (M87∗ Pa-
per VIII). Most likely this higher power indicates that
M87∗ is being fed directly from a larger reservoir of gas
rather than a trickle from stellar winds. This differ-
ence may underlie another substantial divergence be-
tween the sources: the prominent, powerful jet launched
from M87∗, which can be traced at multiple wavelengths
and across nearly eight orders of magnitude in size (EHT
MWL Science Working Group et al. 2021). The M87∗ jet
provides firm constraints on the source orientation with
respect to the line of sight; thus, an inclination of ∼ 20◦
was used for numerical simulations in M87∗ Paper V,
while for Sgr A∗ we do not have any such constraints.
The difference in the masses of Sgr A∗ and M87∗ im-
plies a similar difference in their variability timescales.
The period of the innermost stable circular orbit
(ISCO), which depends on the mass and spin of the black
hole, serves as an approximate dynamical timescale. For
prograde orbits, this period ranges from 4πtg (maximal
spin) to 12√6πtg (zero spin), where tg ≡ GM/c3. For
M87∗, this range corresponds to 5 days to 1 month, so
the source structure is expected to be effectively un-
changed over the course of an observing night.
In-
deed, EHT images of M87∗ reconstructed on consecutive
nights are almost identical (M87∗ Paper IV). However,
for Sgr A∗, the range is only 4–30 min, so the source
structure can evolve within a single night.

3. EHT OBSERVATIONS AND DATA PROCESSING
In this section we summarize the EHT observations
and data processing for Sgr A∗. We refer the reader
to M87∗ Paper II for a comprehensive discussion of the
EHT instrument, M87∗ Paper III for details on the 2017
observing campaign and data processing, and Paper II
for additional details specific to the Sgr A∗ data pro-
cessing.
In 2017, the EHT observed Sgr A∗ on five nights
between April 5 and 11 using an array with 8 partic-
ipating observatories (see Figure 1). Weather condi-
tions were good or excellent at all sites on all five ob-
serving nights. The most sensitive element in the ar-
ray, the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array
(ALMA), only observed Sgr A∗ on April 6, 7, and 11;
the IRAM 30 m Telescope (PV) only observed Sgr A∗ on
April 7. In this initial series of papers, we focus on the
observation with the best baseline coverage: April 7. In
addition, we utilize the April 6 observations for testing,
validation, and selected multi-day analyses. Our multi-
wavelength coverage indicated that there was an X-ray
flare on April 11, accompanied by increased 1.3 mm vari-
ability; we will consider that more complex data set in
future work.

Each site, except the JCMT and ALMA, received data
in two circular polarizations simultaneously. The JCMT
received a single circular polarization, and ALMA re-
ceived orthogonal linear polarizations that are converted

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

5

Figure 2. EHT observations of Sgr A∗ on April 7. Top-Left: EHT baseline coverage, where dimensionless coordinates ⃗u = (u, v)
give the projected baseline vector for each antenna pair in units of the observing wavelength λ. Top-Right: Calibrated visibility
amplitudes of Sgr A∗ as a function of projected baseline length |⃗u|. Error bars show ±1σ thermal (statistical) uncertainties.
Diamonds denote baselines to APEX and JCMT to distinguish them from baselines to their co-located observatories, ALMA
and SMA, respectively. The visibilities have been coherently averaged in 120 second intervals. For comparison, the gray dashed
line shows the Fourier transform of a thin ring with diameter 54 µas that has been convolved with a circular Gaussian kernel of
FWHM 23 µas. The red line and shaded region show the root-mean-square variability and associated 68% credible interval over
the range of baselines for which it can be accurately measured (see Paper IV), while the blue horizontal ticks at zero baseline
length show the range of variations in the total flux density. Bottom: The full light curve of Sgr A∗ on April 7, measured using
ALMA and the SMA as stand-alone interferometers.

to a circular basis in post processing. All EHT sites
recorded data in two frequency bands at 227.1 and
229.1 GHz, referred to as the “low” and “high” bands,
respectively. The total recording rate at each fully-
outfitted station is 32 gigabits/second. The data were
written to arrays of hard drives at each site, that were
then brought from all sites to common locations where
we computed the complex cross-correlation in the elec-
tric fields measured for each pair of stations.

Following the initial computation of these correla-
tions, residual phase and bandpass errors were corrected
with two independent processing pipelines, EHT-HOPS
(Blackburn et al. 2019) and rPICARD (Janssen et al.
2019). The data were then a priori calibrated using
the system equivalent flux densities (SEFDs) for each

telescope. Multiplication by the geometric mean of the
SEFDs of the two stations on a given baseline converts
dimensionless correlation coefficients to flux densities.
SEFDs ranged from 60 Jy at ALMA to 5 × 104 Jy at
low elevation at SMT. Further corrections are still re-
quired, as some sites do not measure the SEFD continu-
ously, and in any case the SEFD does not capture many
amplitude corrupting effects such as pointing and fo-
cus errors. A “network calibration” process, which uses
redundancies in the array (e.g., co-located telescopes)
to provide more accurate time-variable gain normaliza-
tion for sites with co-located partners, was performed.
Sgr A∗ presents a special case for calibration, as it varies
significantly in time, and is surrounded by extended
emission that corrupts the visibility amplitude for base-

−7.5−5.0−2.50.02.55.07.5u(Gλ)−7.5−5.0−2.50.02.55.07.5v(Gλ)25µas50µasintrasiteChile-SMTChile-Hawai’iChile-LMTChile-PVChile-SPTSMT-Hawai’iSMT-LMTSMT-SPTHawai’i-LMTHawai’i-SPTLMT-PVLMT-SPTPV-SPT02468Baseline(Gλ)10−310−210−1100FluxDensity(Jy)56789101112131415Time(h)2.02.22.42.6FluxDensity(Jy)ALMASMA6

The EHT Collaboration et al.

lines within local arrays like ALMA and SMA. Wielgus
et al. (2022) discusses the techniques used to estimate
the time-resolved flux density of Sgr A∗ for this calibra-
tion. For the remaining stations, gain corrections were
computed using observations of the calibrator targets
J1924-2914 and NRAO 530 (Paper II).

Figure 2 shows the EHT baseline coverage and
interferometric visibility amplitudes (“visibilities”) for
Sgr A∗. The longest baselines have an interferomet-
ric fringe spacing of 1/|⃗u| ≈ 24 µas, which defines the
diffraction-limited angular resolution of the EHT. The
visibility amplitudes have two deep minima, the first at
|⃗u| ≈ 3.0 Gλ and the second at |⃗u| ≈ 6.5 Gλ. The ampli-
tudes have a baseline dependence that is similar to that
of an infinitesimally thin ring with a 54 µas diameter
that has been blurred with a circular Gaussian kernel
with 23 µas full width at half maximum (FWHM). The
ring diameter is primarily constrained by the minima lo-
cations, while the width is determined by the amplitude
of the secondary visibility peak between the minima.
For instance, to be consistent with both a first mini-
mum falling between 2.5−3.5 Gλ and a second minimum
falling between 6 − 7 Gλ, the ring must have a diameter
of ∼50 − 60 µas.
However, the EHT data show evidence for complex
and asymmetric source structure beyond a simple ring
model, including a strong dependence on visibility am-
plitudes with the baseline position angle (especially near
the first visibility minimum) and in the closure phases
measured on triangles of EHT baselines, which differ
significantly from 0◦ and 180◦. The EHT visibility am-
plitudes also show indications of residual calibration er-
rors. To assess and quantify the source morphology of
Sgr A∗ more generally, we applied a variety of imaging
and modeling methods using both the interferometric
visibility amplitude and phase information (section 5).
These methods included a variety of approaches to ac-
count for residual calibration errors, including iterative
self-calibration, simultaneous fitting of a model and the
residual station gains, and analyses that used only clo-
sure quantities.

4. HORIZON-SCALE VARIABILITY IN SGR A*
To characterize the spectrum and variability of Sgr A∗,
the EHT observing campaign was supported by paral-
lel observations at several other observatories. Longer-
wavelength VLBI observations, where interstellar scat-
tering prevents direct observation of structural changes,
were arranged to occur within a few days of the EHT
campaign. IR and X-ray observations were arranged to
be as simultaneous as possible with the EHT tracks on
several days, and they resulted in one confirmed X-ray
flare on April 11.

For the observations of April 6 and 7, when no strong
flares were observed in the parallel observations, we must
evaluate whether Sgr A∗ has structural variations within
our observation periods. The simplest evidence for vari-

ability at λ = 1.3 mm comes from analysis of the total
flux density (the “light curve”), which is measured dur-
ing EHT observations using the ALMA and SMA con-
nected element arrays. As discussed in Wielgus et al.
(2022), the fractional variability across all days is ap-
proximately 9%, with variations of 4 − 13% seen within
individual nights (see, e.g., Figure 2). This variability
is an order of magnitude stronger than is expected from
interstellar scintillation. Thus, the light curves provide
evidence for intrinsic image variability in Sgr A∗.

Each EHT baseline provides information about the
detailed structure of this variability on an angular scale
determined by the baseline length. On several trian-
gles, EHT closure phases show slightly more variation
than is expected from their thermal noise, the chang-
ing of projected baselines (from the source view) with
Earth rotation, and interstellar scintillation (Paper II).
Comparison of interferometric visibility amplitudes for
nearby baselines also reveals variability that significantly
exceeds what is expected from thermal noise, calibration
uncertainties, and baseline evolution (Paper IV).

To quantify the variability, we developed a simple
parametric model for the spatio-temporal power spec-
trum for the variability of Sgr A∗ (Georgiev et al. 2022).
This model represents the variance in the visibility am-
plitude as a function of the radial distance in the (u, v)-
plane, taking the form of a broken power law, as moti-
vated by studies of GRMHD simulations. The source-
integrated light curve is divided out in order to isolate
structural variation from overall changes in flux density.
The variability power spectrum was also empirically es-
timated by analyzing variations in visibility amplitudes
on nearby baselines (Broderick et al. 2022). This com-
parison included the same baselines sampled on differ-
ent days, as well as nearby or crossing baseline tracks
(e.g., SPT-LMT and SPT-SMA sample nearly identi-
cal baselines, but at different times). This analysis re-
vealed that the fractional variability can be order unity
for EHT baselines located near the two deep visibility
minima (Figure 2), even after normalizing the data to
remove light curve fluctuations, and that it significantly
exceeds the variability expected from interstellar scintil-
lation (Paper IV).

5. HORIZON-SCALE STRUCTURE IN SGR A*
Each interferometric visibility samples a single com-
plex Fourier component of the image on the sky (e.g.,
Thompson et al. 2017).
Interferometric imaging algo-
rithms seek to produce images from this sparse Fourier-
domain information that are consistent with the data
and physically plausible. Techniques such as the clas-
sical CLEAN algorithm and regularized maximum like-
lihood (RML) methods successfully produced EHT im-
ages of M87∗, with remarkable agreement among meth-
ods (M87∗ Paper IV). The EHT baseline coverage for
Sgr A∗ is substantially better than for M87∗, primar-
ily because of the additional telescope (SPT) with mu-

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

7

Specifically, VLBI imaging typically relies on Earth-
rotation aperture synthesis, in which the projection of
each baseline sweeps out an arc in the (u, v)-plane as the
Earth rotates, allowing a sparse array of telescopes to
obtain the (u, v)-coverage necessary for the imaging of a
static source (Thompson et al. 2017). To account for the
source structural variability, we used a parametric model
discussed in section 4. By incorporating this variability
error budget, imaging and modeling methods designed
for a static source can be applied to analyze data from
a variable source.

To account for the interstellar scattering, we used two
approaches (Paper III). The first, “on-sky imaging,” ap-
plies no modifications to the data or images.
In this
approach, the algorithms simply reconstruct the scat-
tered image of the source. The second, “descattered
imaging,” adds an error budget to interferometric vis-
ibilities to account for stochastic scattering substruc-
ture before deconvolving the ensemble-average scatter-
ing kernel. Both the ensemble-average kernel and the
power spectrum of scattering are used (Psaltis et al.
2018), each of which is precisely known from an anal-
ysis combining of decades of observations of Sgr A∗ at
centimeter wavelengths (Johnson et al. 2018).

To test these imaging techniques and to select appro-
priate imaging parameters, we developed a suite of syn-
thetic observations of seven geometric models that share
the scattering and variability properties of Sgr A∗. This
suite included models with widely varying morphologies:
rings, disks, a crescent, a double source, and a point-
like source with an extended halo. Each model was se-
lected to produce visibility amplitudes that were similar
to those of Sgr A∗, with two deep visibility minima, a
physical scattering model applied, and stochastic tem-
poral evolution generated by a statistical model (Lee &
Gammie 2021).

We then selected the sets of imaging parameters that
accurately reconstruct images across the entire test
suite, including both ring and non-ring data sets. These
“top set” parameter choices yield a corresponding col-
lection of reconstructed images of Sgr A∗ that provide
both a representative average image and a measure of
its uncertainty.
In addition, we used a new Bayesian
imaging method, which simultaneously estimates both
the reconstructed image and its associated variability
noise model (Broderick et al. 2020). This method does
not require training on synthetic data, although we used
the same test suite for comparison and validation of this
method.
When applied to the Sgr A∗ data, over 95% of the top
set images have a prominent ring morphology. For an
analysis using the combination of April 6 and 7 data,
all samples from the Bayesian imaging posterior show
a ring morphology. In addition, geometric modeling of
the EHT data shows a consistent statistical preference
for ring morphologies over alternatives with compara-
ble complexity. The ring has a diameter, width, and

Figure 3. Representative EHT image of Sgr A∗ from ob-
servations on 2017 April 7. This image is an average over
different reconstruction methodologies (CLEAN, RML, and
Bayesian) and reconstructed morphologies. Color denotes
the specific intensity, shown in units of brightness temper-
ature. The inset circle shows the restoring beam used for
CLEAN image reconstructions (20 µas FWHM). The bot-
tom panels show average images within subsets with similar
morphologies, with their prevalence indicated by the inset
bars. The multiplicity of image modes reflects uncertainty
due to the sparse baseline coverage; it does not correspond to
different snapshots of the variable source. Nearly all recon-
structed images show a prominent ring morphology. While
the diameter and thickness of the ring are generally consis-
tent across the reconstructions, the azimuthal structure of
the ring is poorly constrained.

tual visibility of the source. Moreover, at λ = 1.3 mm,
Sgr A∗ has a compact flux density that is approximately
four times larger than that of M87∗, with no apprecia-
ble contribution to the short-baseline visibilities from an
extended jet. However, producing an image of Sgr A∗
requires additional assumptions because of the rapid
source variability and interstellar scattering.

SgrA*April7,201750µas≈10θg02468101214BrightnessTemperature(109K)8

The EHT Collaboration et al.

central brightness depression that are consistent across
the different choices of imaging methods and param-
eters (see Paper III). However, the reconstructed im-
ages show diversity in their specific attributes, partic-
ularly the azimuthal intensity distribution around the
ring. This uncertainty is a consequence of the limited
EHT baseline coverage, compounded by the challenges
of imaging a variable source. We categorized the recon-
structed images into four clusters spanning the primary
reconstructed structures: three clusters are ring modes
with varying position angle, while the fourth is a com-
paratively small set of reconstructed images with diverse
non-ring morphologies. Figure 3 shows a representative
average image of Sgr A∗ on April 7, as well as the av-
erage image for each of these clusters along with their
relative occurrence frequency.

To quantify the ring parameters in a complementary
way, we used several geometrical modeling methods,
the parametrization of which were guided by the recon-
structed images of Sgr A∗. These models are defined
by a thick ring with azimuthal variations determined by
low-order Fourier coefficients and an additional Gaus-
sian brightness floor. Because these simple geometric
models have a small number of parameters, they can
be constrained using instantaneous snapshots of data.
Hence, we used two modeling approaches. With “snap-
shot” modeling, we aggregate a series of independent
fits to two-minute data segments. This approach does
not require a variability model. With “full-track” mod-
eling, we fit both a static geometric source model and
a variability noise model simultaneously to the entire
12-hour observation. Table 1 summarizes the consen-
sus ring parameters measured using these methods (for
detailed results from individual methods, see Paper IV).
In Paper III, we also used dynamic imaging and snap-
shot ring modeling to analyze the intraday image vari-
ability in Sgr A∗. We applied these analysis methods
to the 100-minute intervals on April 6 and 7 with the
best sampling (Farah et al. 2022), adopting a strong ring
prior to counteract the limited baseline coverage. On
April 6, most dynamic imaging and modeling methods
recover a nearly static image, while many reconstruc-
tions on April 7 find an evolving image. However, the
results on April 7 are strongly affected by the underlying
prior assumptions; different parameters in the dynamic
imaging method result in different modes of position
angle evolution in the reconstructed images, including
some reconstructions that are nearly static. Thus, while
the EHT data show detectable signs of image variabil-
ity, we cannot reliably constrain the underlying image
evolution.

6. IMPLICATIONS FOR ACCRETION AND

OUTFLOW PHYSICS

What can we learn from these images and their vari-
ability properties? Focusing first on the astrophysics
of the accretion process and jet launching, we can ex-

Table 1. Measured Parameters of Sgr A∗

Parameter

EHT Estimate

Emission ring:a
Diameter, d
Fractional width, W/d
Orientation, η
Brightness asymmetry, A

Angular gravitational radius,a θg
Black hole mass,b M
Angular shadow diameter,c dsh

Schwarzschild shadow deviation,c δ

Parameter

Angular gravitational radius, θg:

Stellar orbits (VLTI)d
Stellar orbits (Keck)e
Black hole distance, D:
Stellar orbits (VLTI)d
Stellar orbits (Keck)e
Masers (cm VLBI)f
Black hole mass, M:

Stellar orbits (VLTI)d
Stellar orbits (Keck)e

51.8 ± 2.3 µas
∼ 30 − 50%

—

∼ 0.04 − 0.3
4.8+1.4−0.7 µas

4.0+1.1−0.6 × 106 M⊙
48.7 ± 7.0 µas

−0.08+0.09−0.09 (VLTI)
−0.04+0.09−0.10 (Keck)
Previous Estimate

5.125 ± 0.009 ± 0.020 µas
4.92 ± 0.03 ± 0.01 µas

8277 ± 9 ± 33 pc
7935 ± 50 ± 32 pc

8150 ± 150 pc

(4.297 ± 0.013) × 106M⊙
(3.951 ± 0.047) × 106M⊙

a The orientation and magnitude of the ring’s brightness asym-
metry is poorly constrained;
it varies significantly among the
reconstructed image modes and among different modeling and
imaging methods. For details, see Paper IV.
b To translate our estimate of θg into an estimated mass of
Sgr A∗, we use the distance to Sgr A∗ estimated using trigono-
metric VLBI parallaxes and proper motions of molecular masers
in spiral arms of the Milky Way (Reid et al. 2019). For details,
see Paper IV.
c Estimates of dsh are determined solely from EHT data, but
estimates of δ use priors for θg from resolved stellar orbits as
indicated. For details, see Paper VI.
d Gravity Collaboration et al. (2022)
e Do et al. (2019)
f Reid et al. (2019)
Notes. Stated uncertainties correspond to 68% credi-
ble intervals.

plore which physical scenarios are most consistent with
our results, under the assumption that Sgr A* is a Kerr
black hole with mass and distance accurately determined
from stellar orbits. Our constraints on the properties of
the black hole and potential deviations from GR are ex-
plored in Section 7.
We assume that the accretion structure around Sgr A∗
is approximately governed by ideal GRMHD, as was

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

9

done for M87∗, which is common in the literature
for modeling SMBHs (see, e.g., Gammie et al. 2003).
Decades of observations and semi-analytical modeling
(see Paper V for details, references, and caveats) con-
strain the average plasma properties close to the event
horizon of Sgr A∗, allowing us to make several additional
simplifying approximations. In particular, for Sgr A∗ we
can assume that radiative cooling does not strongly af-
fect the dynamics, and that the electrons and ions are
weakly coupled by Coulomb collisions, so that ions and
electrons can have distinct temperatures in some parts
of the flow.

Because we model the plasma as a fluid with a single
temperature, one of our main sources of uncertainty is
the treatment of the electrons, whose presence is not ex-
plicitly accounted for in the simulation evolution equa-
tions. We explore several parameterized models to as-
sign the electron distribution function (eDF), assum-
ing that the electron temperature is proportional to
the proton temperature, with a proportionality that de-
pends on the gas-to-magnetic pressure ratio (Chan et al.
2015). The eDFs include thermal and variations of non-
thermal, the latter of which were not explored in the
M87∗ 2017 papers. Our fiducial thermal models employ
the same eDF prescription as for the M87∗ papers, using
only one free parameter, Rhigh, to specify the proton-to-
electron temperature ratio in regions where gas pressure
dominates the magnetic pressure (Mościbrodzka et al.
2016). This ratio is typically larger in the disk mid-
plane than in the jet/outflow. Since the radiation is
produced by electrons, increasing Rhigh effectively in-
creases the brightness of the jets/outflow region relative
to the disk, and changes the resulting images/spectra
(M87∗ Paper V). Compared to M87∗, we also allow the
inclination angle to vary.

We employ five different ideal GRMHD codes to ex-
plore a large swath of overlapping parameter space, in
some cases with very similar set-ups allowing for consis-
tency checks. In other cases, with a more exploratory
sampling of parameter space, we also allow differences
in, for example, adiabatic index, resolution, and size of
the tori and/or computational domain. Most models are
initialized with an orbiting torus of plasma with char-
acteristic radius ∼ 20GM/c2. The torus is seeded with
a weak, poloidal magnetic field, and can be either pro-
grade or retrograde with respect to the black hole spin
(a free parameter). We also consider a limited set of
exploratory models such as those with ‘tilt’ where the
black hole spin axis is misaligned from the rotation axis
of the torus (Liska et al. 2018; Chatterjee et al. 2020;
White & Quataert 2022), as well as a model initiated
on a very large grid using a more realistic set-up for the
outer boundary conditions in which the accretion flow is
directly fed by winds from orbiting stars (Ressler et al.
2020). Both of these are more realistic physical scenarios
but also allow a much larger range of parameter space
than we could fully explore.

We classify the fiducial models as being in either
the magnetically arrested (MAD; Narayan et al. 2003)
or standard and normal evolution (SANE; Narayan
et al. 2012) modes. In MAD models the ordered mag-
netic fields significantly affect the dynamics of the flow,
episodically halting accretion onto the black hole, while
SANE models have weaker, more turbulent magnetic
fields. Because the dynamical timescale in Sgr A∗ is
short compared to a night of observations, it is impor-
tant to run each model for enough time to capture the
range of spectral and structural variations. The simula-
tions are typically run for 30,000tg, while some are run
for more than 100,000tg in order to sample a broader
distribution of behavior.

For each time-dependent GRMHD simulation, with
an eDF prescription and inclination with respect to
the line-of-sight, we calculate a sequence of model im-
ages (movies) using ray tracing and including syn-
chrotron emission and absorption. We also calculate
spectra including synchrotron emission and absorption,
bremsstrahlung emission and, using Monte Carlo meth-
ods, Compton scattering. These synthetic data sets are
then used to generate simulated EHT images as well as
multi-wavelength light curves and spectral energy dis-
tributions (SEDs) for comparison with the Sgr A∗ data
described in Paper II. We scale all images to a bench-
mark average flux density of 2.4 Jy at 230 GHz to match
the average synchrotron flux density of Sgr A∗ (see Pa-
per II and Wielgus et al. 2022).

We evaluate the simulations against three types of ob-
servational constraints: EHT interferometric measure-
ments, emission at other wavelengths, and variability.
The EHT constraints include 1) a measure of the im-
age size, 2) salient features from the visibility ampli-
tudes, such as the location of the first deep minimum,
and 3) the diameter, asymmetry, and width of simpli-
fied ring models fitted to well-sampled portions of the
April 7 visibility data. The constraints from other wave-
lengths include the flux densities at 86 GHz, 2.2 µm in
the NIR, and X-ray, and the major axis source size at
86 GHz, constrained from observations with the Global
mm-VLBI Array. Finally, the variability constraints are
1) the fractional 230 GHz variability on 3 h timescales,
derived from more than a decade of measurements, and
2) the structural variability of the source, calculated at
a baseline length of 4Gλ after fitting a parameterized
model to the visibility amplitude variation versus base-
line length. See Paper V for the full ranges of tests and
pass/fail conditions.
Compared to M87∗ Paper V, we explore a larger range
of models and model parameter space, and we also in-
clude some additional observational constraints. These
include the degree of intrinsic variability as well as the
broadband spectral constraints given above. Accord-
ingly, we find that all our models fail at least one of
the observational constraints. These results indicate the
power of combining interferometric data with other ob-

10

The EHT Collaboration et al.

Figure 4. Summary of constraints on our 200 fiducial GRMHD simulations. Color indicates combined EHT constraints apart
from structural or flux variability, and hatching indicates combined non-EHT constraints. For each constraint category and
parameter combination, we delineate whether all of the three simulation codes run with those parameters pass, whether only
some pass, or whether none pass. These exclusions leave only two models, each a MAD with prograde spin, 30◦ inclination, and
Rhigh = 160. For details, see Paper V.

servational constraints to narrow down the viable phys-
ical parameter space. We now summarize our main re-
sults and their implications for our understanding of
Sgr A∗’s accretion state and geometry.

We primarily focus on a set of “fiducial” simulations,
which use aligned (prograde or retrograde) accretion
flows and thermal eDFs defined via the Rhigh prescrip-
tion. We declare a model to fully pass a set of con-
straints only when all GRMHD simulations with those
parameters pass. This approach helps to ensure that
our selection of favored models is resilient to small vari-
ations in the GRMHD simulation choices and software.
Figure 4 summarizes these results.

All edge-on (high inclination) models fail the com-
bined set of EHT-only constraints for at least one sim-
ulation, and almost all retrograde models (a∗ < 0) fail.
There are two interesting groupings of models that pass
all EHT constraints for all simulations: both have pos-
itive/prograde spin (a∗ = 0.5, 0.94) with lower (≤ 50◦)
inclination, but some are MAD (10) and some are SANE
(8). With only ∼10% pass rate for all models, it is clear
that EHT imaging data alone are capable of strongly
down-selecting the potential model space. The more
heterogeneous non-EHT constraints prefer a rather dif-
ferent set of models. However even with all these con-
straints, 11/200 models pass for all simulations; all of
these are MADs with all but one having Rhigh = 160.
On the other hand, they cover a wider range of spin
compared to EHT-only constraints, with a slight pref-

erence for a∗ ≤ 0 and higher inclinations, and including
retrograde and edge-on models.
None of the 200 fiducial models pass all 11 constraints
in combination, the most strict of which are the 86 GHz
size, the ring diameter and the light curve variability on
3-hour timescales. Of these, the light curve variability
turns out to be the most stringent constraint, passing
only 4% of fiducial models. SANE models, which are less
variable than MADs, are preferred, while all the other
EHT/non-EHT constraints generally favor MADs. If we
consider the set of models that pass 10/11 constraints,
it is notable that for both MADs and SANEs, there is
still a marked preference for models with prograde spin,
a lower inclination and Rhigh > 40 with several clustered
at the maximum of Rhigh = 160.

The “exploratory” models cover less of a range in pa-
rameter space but still indicate important trends.
In
particular, including non-thermal electrons (which are
especially important for modeling flares) tends to push
the limits of allowed NIR flux and, to some extent, also
the X-ray flux. Because the non-thermal particles also
enhance the 230 GHz flux density, rescaling to a fixed
flux density results in a smaller accretion rate. The
smaller resulting opacity then affects the image proper-
ties, such as producing a somewhat narrower ring mor-
phology at 230 GHz and a larger image at 86 GHz. Nev-
ertheless, the addition of non-thermal models does not
drastically change the preferred parameter space, and
passing models also favor prograde spin and lower in-
clination. Increased tilt of the accretion flow tends to

10°30°50°70°90°11040160SANEia* = -0.9410°30°50°70°90°11040160ia* = -0.510°30°50°70°90°11040160ia* = 0.010°30°50°70°90°11040160ia* = 0.510°30°50°70°90°11040160ia* = 0.9410°30°50°70°90°MADi10°30°50°70°90°i10°30°50°70°90°i10°30°50°70°90°i10°30°50°70°90°iRhighEHT Pass AllEHT Pass SomeEHT Fail Allnon-EHT Pass Allnon-EHT Pass Somenon-EHT Fail AllThe Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

11

Figure 5. Simulated images of Sgr A∗. Left: A single snapshot image of a numerical simulation of Sgr A∗ that passes 10 out
of the 11 observational criteria described in Paper V. Middle: The average of this simulation with time sampling that matches
the EHT observational cadence on April 7. Right: Representative image reconstruction using synthetic visibilities generated
from the simulation in the adjacent panels (see Appendix H in Paper III). This image has been averaged across methodologies
and reconstructed morphologies, as in Figure 3. Each panel is shown on a linear brightness scale that is normalized to its peak.

increase variability and the NIR flux, and thus leads to
model failures. Similarly, neither of the two wind-fed
models passed, but this is not surprising as they only
model a single spin (a∗ = 0) and two instances of the
thermal Rhigh eDF. With such sparse sampling of pa-
rameter space, these classes of models require a more
focused study to draw conclusions.
Overall, very few of our models are as quiet as the
data. Although this wasn’t investigated in M87∗ Pa-
per V, subsequent work suggests a similar result for
M87∗ simulations (Satapathy et al. 2022).
In general
SANE models are less variable than MADs, and face-on
models are somewhat less variable than edge-on. How-
ever, there are limitations of the modeling that may af-
fect the variability. For instance, collisionless effects,
radiative cooling, and improved electron heating mod-
els could all potentially reduce variability. Thus, our
variability constraints may be too strict.

There are only two models that pass everything but
the variability constraints. The models have similar pa-
rameters: both are MAD, both are prograde spin (one
has a∗ = 0.5, and the other has a∗ = 0.94), and both
have i = 30◦ and Rhigh = 160. Figure 5 shows a rep-
resentative snapshot from one of these simulations and
its corresponding image reconstruction. If we take these
two models as indicative, there is a preference for accre-
tion rates at the lower end of the range found by other
constraints, 10−9 − 10−8M⊙/yr, and an outflow power
of ∼1038 erg/s, which is comparable to the bolometric
luminosity of stellar-mass black holes in X-ray binaries.
The combination of high Rhigh and relatively low in-
clination satisfies the spectral constraints without their
associated jet structure producing too much asymme-
try to satisfy the EHT constraints. A low inclination
is also consistent with the independent estimate based
on tracking the motions of NIR flaring structures us-

ing the VLTI (Gravity Collaboration et al. 2018b). Our
results highlight the value of continued EHT plus mul-
tiwavelength monitoring of Sgr A∗, and there is clearly
much more exploration to conduct, including improved
theoretical models and numerical simulations, full SED
modeling, and polarimetric imaging, all of which will
yield deeper physical insights (see, e.g., Event Horizon
Telescope Collaboration et al. 2021b).

7. IMPLICATIONS FOR BLACK HOLES AND

GENERAL RELATIVITY

As demonstrated using the suite of GRMHD simula-
tions discussed in section 6, the EHT images of Sgr A∗
are consistent with the expected appearance of a Kerr
black hole. Moreover, our images are consistent with an
angular gravitational radius θg that matches the expec-
tations from nearly Keplerian orbits of stars on scales of
(103 − 105)RS.
To quantify this consistency, we compute θg using
EHT measurements alone (for details, see Paper IV).
Following the procedure developed in M87∗ Paper VI,
we estimate θg by calibrating the observed emission ring
diameter d to the known angular gravitational scale
θg for a suite of synthetic datasets produced from the
GRMHD library presented in Paper V. Specifically, we
generate 100 datasets from GRMHD simulations with
varying intrinsic θg and that span the explored range in
accretion states, black hole spins, viewing inclinations,
position angles, and phenomenological electron heating
parameters Rhigh. Each synthetic dataset matches the
baseline coverage and sensitivity of the EHT observa-
tions. We then estimate the ring diameter using multi-
ple geometric modeling and imaging methods, deriving
a separate calibration factor α ≡ d/θg for each method
and for every dataset to attain a method-dependent scal-
ing relationship and associated uncertainty.

50µas≈10θg0.00.20.40.60.81.0NormalizedIntensity12

The EHT Collaboration et al.

With this approach, we estimate θg = 4.8+1.4−0.7 µas
for Sgr A∗, where the uncertainties correspond to a
68% credible interval. This estimate is consistent with,
but much less constraining than, measurements of θg us-
ing resolved stellar orbits (see Table 1). This procedure
assumes the validity of the Kerr metric and relies on
our suite of GRMHD simulations to provide a reason-
able proxy for the space of viable emission models. The
fractional uncertainty in our estimate of θg for Sgr A∗ is
broader than our estimate for M87∗ (θg = 3.8± 0.4 µas),
primarily because of the increased calibration uncer-
tainty associated with the unknown inclination of Sgr A∗
and because of the increased diameter measurement un-
certainty associated with intrinsic variability of Sgr A∗.
We also used EHT images to constrain potential de-
viations from the Kerr metric and to test the nature of
the compact object in Sgr A∗ (for details, see Paper VI).
For instance, the brightness depression has a contrast
fc <∼ 0.3, which provides support for the existence of an
event horizon in Sgr A∗. If the compact object instead
had an absorptive boundary that radiated the thermal-
ized energy of infalling material
˙M c2, it could still pro-
duce a depression in the EHT images but would gener-
ate IR emission that greatly exceeds the measured spec-
trum of Sgr A∗ (Broderick & Narayan 2006; Narayan &
McClintock 2008). Alternatively, a partially reflecting
surface would reduce the depth of the depression; the
EHT images directly constrain the albedo of such a re-
flecting surface to be <∼ 0.3. The brightness depression
also rules out several specific black hole alternatives, in-
cluding some models of naked singularities (e.g., Joshi
et al. 2014) and some models of boson stars (e.g., Oli-
vares et al. 2020), although other horizonless black-hole
mimickers produce apparent shadows that are consistent
with the observed depression (e.g., Shaikh et al. 2019).
The measured ring diameter also provides constraints
on the spacetime metric. To obtain these constraints, we
generate a series of synthetic images to relate a measured
emission ring diameter to that of the underlying black
hole shadow. These images included a broad range of
GRMHD simulations from Paper V, as well as images for
which the GRMHD and underlying metric assumptions
are relaxed. Specifically, we generated sets of images
of analytic models for accretion onto 1) a Kerr black
hole, 2) a black hole with parametric deviations from
Kerr given by the Johannsen-Psaltis metric (Johannsen
& Psaltis 2011), and 3) a non-Kerr black hole defined
by the Kerr-Sen metric (García et al. 1995). For each
analytic model, we allow the emission prescriptions to
vary within physically plausible limits (for details, see
Özel et al. 2021; Younsi et al. 2021). We find a similar
relationship between the diameter of the emission ring
and that of the black hole shadow in all these cases, indi-
cating that this relationship is insensitive to the details
of the underlying spacetime.

Selecting a subset of these models, we then generate
145 synthetic datasets. We apply imaging and modeling

methods to compute the ring diameter for each dataset
to evaluate method-dependent measurement uncertain-
ties and biases. We then use this calibration together
with the EHT measurements of the ring diameter to de-
termine the angular diameter of the black hole shadow
for Sgr A∗: dsh = 48.7 ± 7.0 µas. This result is tighter
than the range for θg derived above because of differ-
ences in the calibration datasets and procedures used in
Paper IV and Paper VI. Specifically, Paper IV uses a cal-
ibration suite that consists entirely of dynamic GRMHD
models, and it derives a scale factor between θg and the
angular diameter of the emission ring. In contrast, Pa-
per VI uses a calibration suite containing both static
Kerr and non-Kerr images and dynamic GRMHD mod-
els, and it derives a scale factor between dsh and the
angular diameter of the emission ring. Paper VI also
excludes datasets for which the range of reconstructed
diameters is more than 2 − 3 times the range that is
measured using the Sgr A∗ data. Thus, comparison of
these results provides a measure of the impact of our as-
sumptions and procedures on the inference of the black
hole properties.
By comparing this shadow diameter with stellar dy-
namical measurements of the mass of Sgr A∗, we also
determine a deviation parameter δ, which quantifies
the fractional difference between the inferred shadow
diameter and its expected value for a non-spinning
(Schwarzschild) black hole (for details, see Paper VI).
We find δ = −0.08+0.09−0.09 when using VLTI measurements
of θg and δ = −0.04+0.09−0.10 when using Keck measure-
ments of θg (see Table 1). For comparison, a spinning
(Kerr) black hole has −0.08 ≤ δ ≤ 0.
Under the assumption that this range of calibration
factors applies generically to all non-Kerr spacetimes
that have black hole shadows, we can translate measure-
ments of δ into constraints on parameters of these space-
times (Psaltis et al. 2020). In particular, our measure-
ments exclude specific non-Kerr solutions for Sgr A∗,
such as the traversible Morris-Thorne wormhole and
the naked singularities in the Reissner-Nordström met-
ric, which predict shadows that are significantly smaller
than those of Kerr black holes.
Relative to M87∗, the primary strengths of testing GR
with EHT observations of Sgr A∗ are the tight prior con-
straints on its mass-to-distance ratio θg and its shorter
gravitational timescale that allows EHT observations to
span many dynamical times. Together, these results
show SMBHs consistent with predictions of the Kerr
metric over a spread of three orders of magnitude in their
mass (see Figure 6). The image of Sgr A∗ probes a sim-
ilar gravitational potential to M87∗ but spacetime cur-
vature ξ ∝ M−2 that is six orders of magnitude larger.
When combined with constraints from the measurement
of gravitational waves from coalescing black-hole bina-
ries with LIGO/Virgo, these results show a striking val-
idation of the predictions of GR over a vast range of

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

13

GRMHD simulations. These simulations are remarkably
successful at predicting the 1.3 mm image structure and
broadband spectrum of Sgr A∗. However, the GRMHD
simulations tend to be more variable than the observa-
tions, which may be related to our fluid modeling of a
collisionless plasma or our neglect of radiative cooling,
and only a few configurations can satisfy our full set
of observational constraints apart from variability. Our
results generally favor models with dynamically strong
magnetic fields, moderate (prograde) spin, a lower in-
clination viewing angle, and strongly decoupled protons
and electrons in the emission region. Interestingly, these
models also predict a reasonably efficient (compared to
the accretion rate) jet outflow, which points to interest-
ing complementary future studies. However more work
is needed to fully explore the physical parameter space,
and to understand the variability.
As the nearest supermassive black hole, Sgr A∗ can
be scrutinized in ways that are impossible for other
sources, making it a unique laboratory for exploring the
astrophysics of black holes and testing the predictions
of General Relativity. The results presented in these
papers are the first EHT contributions to the study of
this source, but they are not the last. Subsequent work
will characterize the magnetic field configuration of this
source through polarimetric observations, as was done
for M87∗, and describe the structural changes associated
with flare activity on April 11. Since 2017, the EHT has
continued to gather data using an increasing number
of array elements and doubled recording bandwidth.
These data will provide improved sensitivity and enable
more robust imaging of this dynamic source, eventually
allowing movie reconstructions of plasma motions on
the ∼hour orbital timescales.
We thank the anonymous referees for helpful com-
ments that improved the paper. The Event Horizon
Telescope Collaboration thanks the following organiza-
tions and programs: the Academia Sinica; the Academy
of Finland (projects 274477, 284495, 312496, 315721);
the Agencia Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo
(ANID), Chile via NCN19_058 (TITANs) and Fonde-
cyt 1221421, the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung; an
Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship; Allegro, the Eu-
ropean ALMA Regional Centre node in the Nether-
lands, the NL astronomy research network NOVA and
the astronomy institutes of the University of Amster-
dam, Leiden University and Radboud University; the
ALMA North America Development Fund; the Black
Hole Initiative, which is funded by grants from the
John Templeton Foundation and the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation (although the opinions expressed in
this work are those of the author(s) and do not nec-
essarily reflect the views of these Foundations); Chan-
dra DD7-18089X and TM6-17006X; the China Schol-
arship Council; China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
fellowship (2020M671266); Consejo Nacional de Cien-

Figure 6. Comparison of posterior distributions for the
Schwarzschild fractional shadow deviation parameter δ mea-
sured by the EHT for Sgr A∗ and M87∗. For Sgr A∗, δ is
computed relative the expected shadow size from monitoring
stellar orbits; for M87∗, δ is computed for both the expected
shadow from stellar dynamics and from gas dynamics (for de-
tails, see M87∗ Paper VI). The gray band shows the expected
range of δ for the Kerr metric. For the stellar-dynamical prior
mass estimates, the EHT measurements show close consis-
tency with the same black hole metric over three orders of
magnitude in black hole mass.

scales, from stellar mass black holes to supermassive
black holes that are billions of times larger.

8. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

Here we present the results of 2017 EHT observa-
tions of Sgr A∗, the central supermassive black hole in
the Milky Way. We find evidence for intraday struc-
tural variability in Sgr A∗, confirming changes that were
hinted at in prior observations across the electromag-
netic spectrum. These variations challenge standard ap-
proaches to interferometric analysis, so we have devel-
oped a variety of methods to infer the structure of this
source from our data. From observations on April 7, on
which we have the best-sampled data, our analyses con-
sistently reveal a ring-like structure, similar to that seen
in M87∗. Less complete observations on April 6 support
this picture.

This ring of emission and its central brightness de-
pression closely mirror the structure expected from the
plasma in accretion and outflow structures bordering the
event horizon of a black hole and partially lensed by its
gravity. The angular diameter of this ring is consis-
tent with that expected from the black hole mass in-
ferred from stellar orbits. This consistency allows us to
restrict the allowed values of parameters that describe
deviations from a Kerr black hole, as predicted by Gen-
eral Relativity. We compare our data, including mea-
surements at other wavelengths, with a large suite of

10610710810910101011Black-holemass(M(cid:12))−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.250.000.250.500.751.00FractionaldeviationδSgrA*M87*GRstarsgas14

The EHT Collaboration et al.

cia y Tecnología (CONACYT, Mexico, projects U0004-
246083, U0004-259839, F0003-272050, M0037-279006,
F0003-281692, 104497, 275201, 263356); the Consejería
de Economía, Conocimiento, Empresas y Universidad
of the Junta de Andalucía (grant P18-FR-1769), the
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (grant
2019AEP112); the Delaney Family via the Delaney Fam-
ily John A. Wheeler Chair at Perimeter Institute; Di-
rección General de Asuntos del Personal Académico-
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (DGAPA-
UNAM, projects IN112417 and IN112820); the Dutch
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) VICI award
(grant 639.043.513) and grant OCENW.KLEIN.113; the
Dutch National Supercomputers, Cartesius and Snel-
lius (NWO Grant 2021.013); the EACOA Fellowship
awarded by the East Asia Core Observatories Asso-
ciation, which consists of the Academia Sinica Insti-
tute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, the National As-
tronomical Observatory of Japan, Center for Astro-
nomical Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
and the Korea Astronomy and Space Science Insti-
tute;
the European Research Council (ERC) Syn-
ergy Grant “BlackHoleCam: Imaging the Event Hori-
zon of Black Holes" (grant 610058);
the European
Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreements RadioNet (No 730562) and
M2FINDERS (No 101018682); the Generalitat Valen-
ciana postdoctoral grant APOSTD/2018/177 and GenT
Program (project CIDEGENT/2018/021); MICINN Re-
search Project PID2019-108995GB-C22; the European
Research Council for advanced grant ‘JETSET: Launch-
ing, propagation and emission of relativistic jets from
binary mergers and across mass scales’ (Grant No.
884631); the Institute for Advanced Study; the Is-
tituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) sezione
di Napoli,
iniziative specifiche TEONGRAV; the In-
ternational Max Planck Research School for Astron-
omy and Astrophysics at the Universities of Bonn and
Cologne; DFG research grant “Jet physics on hori-
zon scales and beyond” (Grant No. FR 4069/2-1);
Joint Princeton/Flatiron and Joint Columbia/Flatiron
Postdoctoral Fellowships, research at the Flatiron In-
stitute is supported by the Simons Foundation; the
Japan Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology (MEXT; grant JPMXP1020200109);
the Japanese Government (Monbukagakusho: MEXT)
Scholarship; the Japan Society for the Promotion of Sci-
ence (JSPS) Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Research Fellowship
(JP17J08829); the Joint Institute for Computational
Fundamental Science, Japan; the Key Research Pro-
gram of Frontier Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS, grants QYZDJ-SSW-SLH057, QYZDJSSW-
SYS008, ZDBS-LY-SLH011);
the Leverhulme Trust
Early Career Research Fellowship; the Max-Planck-
Gesellschaft (MPG); the Max Planck Partner Group
of the MPG and the CAS; the MEXT/JSPS KAK-
ENHI (grants 18KK0090, JP21H01137, JP18H03721,

Inc.,

18K03709,

JP19K14761,

JP18K13594,
18H01245,
25120007); the Malaysian Fundamental Research Grant
Scheme (FRGS) FRGS/1/2019/STG02/UM/02/6; the
MIT International Science and Technology Initiatives
(MISTI) Funds; the Ministry of Science and Tech-
nology (MOST) of Taiwan (103-2119-M-001-010-MY2,
105-2112-M-001-025-MY3, 105-2119-M-001-042, 106-
2112-M-001-011, 106-2119-M-001-013, 106-2119-M-001-
027, 106-2923-M-001-005, 107-2119-M-001-017, 107-
2119-M-001-020, 107-2119-M-001-041, 107-2119-M-110-
005, 107-2923-M-001-009, 108-2112-M-001-048, 108-
2112-M-001-051, 108-2923-M-001-002, 109-2112-M-001-
025, 109-2124-M-001-005, 109-2923-M-001-001, 110-
2112-M-003-007-MY2, 110-2112-M-001-033, 110-2124-
M-001-007, and 110-2923-M-001-001); the Ministry of
Education (MoE) of Taiwan Yushan Young Scholar Pro-
gram; the Physics Division, National Center for The-
oretical Sciences of Taiwan; the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA, Fermi Guest In-
vestigator grant 80NSSC20K1567, NASA Astrophysics
Theory Program grant 80NSSC20K0527, NASA NuS-
TAR award 80NSSC20K0645); NASA Hubble Fellow-
ship grant HST-HF2-51431.001-A awarded by the Space
Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by the
Association of Universities for Research in Astron-
for NASA, under contract NAS5-26555;
omy,
Institute of Natural Sciences (NINS)
the National
of Japan;
the National Key Research and Devel-
opment Program of China (grant 2016YFA0400704,
2017YFA0402703, 2016YFA0400702); the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF, grants AST-0096454, AST-
0352953, AST-0521233, AST-0705062, AST-0905844,
AST-0922984, AST-1126433, AST-1140030, DGE-
1144085, AST-1207704, AST-1207730, AST-1207752,
MRI-1228509, OPP-1248097, AST-1310896, AST-
1440254, AST-1555365, AST-1614868, AST-1615796,
AST-1715061, AST-1716327, AST-1716536, OISE-
1743747, AST-1816420, AST-1935980, AST-2034306);
NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fel-
lowship (AST-1903847); the Natural Science Founda-
tion of China (grants 11650110427, 10625314, 11721303,
11725312, 11873028, 11933007, 11991052, 11991053,
12192220, 12192223); the Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada (NSERC, includ-
ing a Discovery Grant and the NSERC Alexander Gra-
ham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarships-Doctoral Pro-
gram); the National Youth Thousand Talents Program
of China; the National Research Foundation of Ko-
rea (the Global PhD Fellowship Grant: grants NRF-
2015H1A2A1033752, the Korea Research Fellowship
Program: NRF-2015H1D3A1066561, Brain Pool Pro-
gram: 2019H1D3A1A01102564, Basic Research Support
Grant 2019R1F1A1059721,
2021R1A6A3A01086420,
2022R1C1C1005255); Netherlands Research School for
Astronomy (NOVA) Virtual
Institute of Accretion
(VIA) postdoctoral fellowships; Onsala Space Observa-
tory (OSO) national infrastructure, for the provision-

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

15

ing of its facilities/observational support (OSO receives
funding through the Swedish Research Council under
grant 2017-00648); the Perimeter Institute for Theo-
retical Physics (research at Perimeter Institute is sup-
ported by the Government of Canada through the De-
partment of Innovation, Science and Economic Develop-
ment and by the Province of Ontario through the Min-
istry of Research, Innovation and Science); the Spanish
Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (grants PGC2018-
098915-B-C21, AYA2016-80889-P, PID2019-108995GB-
C21, PID2020-117404GB-C21); the University of Preto-
ria for financial aid in the provision of the new Clus-
ter Server nodes and SuperMicro (USA) for a SEED-
ING GRANT approved towards these nodes in 2020;
the Shanghai Pilot Program for Basic Research, Chi-
nese Academy of Science, Shanghai Branch (JCYJ-
SHFY-2021-013); the State Agency for Research of
the Spanish MCIU through the “Center of Excellence
Severo Ochoa” award for the Instituto de Astrofísica
de Andalucía (SEV-2017- 0709); the Spinoza Prize SPI
78-409; the South African Research Chairs Initiative,
through the South African Radio Astronomy Observa-
tory (SARAO, grant ID 77948), which is a facility of the
National Research Foundation (NRF), an agency of the
Department of Science and Innovation (DSI) of South
Africa; the Toray Science Foundation; Swedish Research
Council (VR); the US Department of Energy (USDOE)
through the Los Alamos National Laboratory (operated
by Triad National Security, LLC, for the National Nu-
clear Security Administration of the USDOE (Contract
89233218CNA000001); and the YCAA Prize Postdoc-
toral Fellowship.

We thank the staff at the participating observatories,
correlation centers, and institutions for their enthusi-
astic support. This paper makes use of the follow-
ing ALMA data: ADS/JAO.ALMA#2016.1.01154.V.
ALMA is a partnership of the European Southern
Observatory (ESO; Europe, representing its member
states), NSF, and National Institutes of Natural Sci-
ences of Japan, together with National Research Council
(Canada), Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST;
Taiwan), Academia Sinica Institute of Astronomy and
Astrophysics (ASIAA; Taiwan), and Korea Astronomy
and Space Science Institute (KASI; Republic of Korea),
in cooperation with the Republic of Chile. The Joint
ALMA Observatory is operated by ESO, Associated
Universities, Inc. (AUI)/NRAO, and the National As-
tronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ). The NRAO is
a facility of the NSF operated under cooperative agree-
ment by AUI. This research used resources of the Oak
Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of
Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Con-
tract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. We also thank the
Center for Computational Astrophysics, National Astro-
nomical Observatory of Japan. The computing cluster
of Shanghai VLBI correlator supported by the Special

Fund for Astronomy from the Ministry of Finance in
China is acknowledged.

APEX is a collaboration between the Max-Planck-
Institut für Radioastronomie (Germany), ESO, and the
Onsala Space Observatory (Sweden). The SMA is a
joint project between the SAO and ASIAA and is funded
by the Smithsonian Institution and the Academia Sinica.
The JCMT is operated by the East Asian Observatory
on behalf of the NAOJ, ASIAA, and KASI, as well as
the Ministry of Finance of China, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, and the National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program (No. 2017YFA0402700) of China and
Natural Science Foundation of China grant 11873028.
Additional funding support for the JCMT is provided
by the Science and Technologies Facility Council (UK)
and participating universities in the UK and Canada.
The LMT is a project operated by the Instituto Na-
cional de Astrófisica, Óptica, y Electrónica (Mexico) and
the University of Massachusetts at Amherst (USA). The
IRAM 30-m telescope on Pico Veleta, Spain is operated
by IRAM and supported by CNRS (Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, France), MPG (Max-Planck-
Gesellschaft, Germany) and IGN (Instituto Geográfico
Nacional, Spain). The SMT is operated by the Arizona
Radio Observatory, a part of the Steward Observatory of
the University of Arizona, with financial support of op-
erations from the State of Arizona and financial support
for instrumentation development from the NSF. Support
for SPT participation in the EHT is provided by the Na-
tional Science Foundation through award OPP-1852617
to the University of Chicago. Partial support is also
provided by the Kavli Institute of Cosmological Physics
at the University of Chicago. The SPT hydrogen maser
was provided on loan from the GLT, courtesy of ASIAA.
This work used the Extreme Science and Engineering
Discovery Environment (XSEDE), supported by NSF
grant ACI-1548562, and CyVerse, supported by NSF
grants DBI-0735191, DBI-1265383, and DBI-1743442.
XSEDE Stampede2 resource at TACC was allocated
through TG-AST170024 and TG-AST080026N. XSEDE
JetStream resource at PTI and TACC was allocated
through AST170028. This research is part of the Fron-
tera computing project at the Texas Advanced Com-
puting Center through the Frontera Large-Scale Com-
munity Partnerships allocation AST20023. Frontera is
made possible by National Science Foundation award
OAC-1818253. This research was carried out using re-
sources provided by the Open Science Grid, which is
supported by the National Science Foundation and the
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. Addi-
tional work used ABACUS2.0, which is part of the
eScience center at Southern Denmark University. Sim-
ulations were also performed on the SuperMUC clus-
ter at the LRZ in Garching, on the LOEWE clus-
ter in CSC in Frankfurt, on the HazelHen cluster at
the HLRS in Stuttgart, and on the Pi2.0 and Siyuan
Mark-I at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. The com-

16

The EHT Collaboration et al.

puter resources of the Finnish IT Center for Science
(CSC) and the Finnish Computing Competence In-
frastructure (FCCI) project are acknowledged. This
research was enabled in part by support provided
by Compute Ontario (http://computeontario.ca), Cal-
cul Quebec (http://www.calculquebec.ca) and Compute
Canada (http://www.computecanada.ca).

The EHTC has received generous donations of FPGA
chips from Xilinx Inc., under the Xilinx University
Program. The EHTC has benefited from technology
shared under open-source license by the Collaboration
for Astronomy Signal Processing and Electronics Re-
search (CASPER). The EHT project is grateful to
T4Science and Microsemi for their assistance with Hy-
drogen Masers. This research has made use of NASA’s
Astrophysics Data System. We gratefully acknowl-

edge the support provided by the extended staff of the
ALMA, both from the inception of the ALMA Phasing
Project through the observational campaigns of 2017
and 2018. We would like to thank A. Deller and W.
Brisken for EHT-specific support with the use of DiFX.
We thank Martin Shepherd for the addition of extra
features in the Difmap software that were used for the
CLEAN imaging results presented in this paper. We
acknowledge the significance that Maunakea, where the
SMA and JCMT EHT stations are located, has for the
indigenous Hawaiian people.

Facility: EHT, ALMA, APEX, IRAM:30m, JCMT,
LMT, SMA, ARO:SMT, SPT, Chandra, EAVN, GMVA,
NuSTAR, Swift, VLT.

Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., et al. 2016,

Broderick, A. E., Gold, R., Karami, M., et al. 2020, ApJ,

REFERENCES

PhRvL, 116, 061102,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102

Agol, E. 2000, ApJL, 538, L121, doi: 10.1086/312818
Baganoff, F. K., Bautz, M. W., Brandt, W. N., et al. 2001,

Nature, 413, 45, doi: 10.1038/35092510

Baganoff, F. K., Maeda, Y., Morris, M., et al. 2003, ApJ,

591, 891, doi: 10.1086/375145

Balick, B., & Brown, R. L. 1974, ApJ, 194, 265,

doi: 10.1086/153242

Bardeen, J. M. 1973, Les Astres Occlus, 215
Blackburn, L., Chan, C.-k., Crew, G. B., et al. 2019, ApJ,

882, 23, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab328d

Blandford, R. D., & Begelman, M. C. 1999, MNRAS, 303,

L1, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.1999.02358.x

Blandford, R. D., & Königl, A. 1979, ApJ, 232, 34,

doi: 10.1086/157262

Bolton, C. T. 1972, Nature, 235, 271, doi: 10.1038/235271b0
Bower, G. C., Backer, D. C., Zhao, J.-H., Goss, M., &
Falcke, H. 1999, ApJ, 521, 582, doi: 10.1086/307592

Bower, G. C., Falcke, H., Herrnstein, R. M., et al. 2004,

Science, 304, 704, doi: 10.1126/science.1094023

Bower, G. C., Goss, W. M., Falcke, H., Backer, D. C., &

Lithwick, Y. 2006, ApJL, 648, L127, doi: 10.1086/508019

Bower, G. C., Wright, M. C. H., Falcke, H., & Backer,

D. C. 2003, ApJ, 588, 331

Broderick, A. E., Fish, V. L., Doeleman, S. S., & Loeb, A.

2009, ApJ, 697, 45, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/697/1/45
Broderick, A. E., Gold, R., Georgiev, B., et al. 2022, in

Broderick, A. E., & Narayan, R. 2006, ApJL, 638, L21,

prep., 00, 0, doi: TBD

doi: 10.1086/500930

897, 139, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab91a4

Chan, C.-K., Psaltis, D., Özel, F., Narayan, R., & Sad¸owski,

A. 2015, ApJ, 799, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/799/1/1

Chatterjee, K., Younsi, Z., Liska, M., et al. 2020, MNRAS,

499, 362, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2718

Coker, R., Melia, F., & Falcke, H. 1999, ApJ, 523, 642,

doi: 10.1086/307770

Dexter, J., Agol, E., & Fragile, P. C. 2009, ApJL, 703,

L142, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/703/2/L142

Do, T., Hees, A., Ghez, A., et al. 2019, Science, 365, 664,

doi: 10.1126/science.aav8137

Doeleman, S. S., Shen, Z.-Q., Rogers, A. E. E., et al. 2001,

AJ, 121, 2610, doi: 10.1086/320376

Doeleman, S. S., Weintroub, J., Rogers, A. E. E., et al.

2008, Nature, 455, 78, doi: 10.1038/nature07245

Eckart, A., Baganoff, F. K., Morris, M., et al. 2004, A&A,

427, 1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20040495

EHT MWL Science Working Group, Algaba, J. C.,

Anczarski, J., et al. 2021, ApJL, 911, L11,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abef71

Einstein, A. 1915, Sitzungsberichte der Königlich

Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin), 844
Ekers, R. D., Goss, W. M., Schwarz, U. J., Downes, D., &

Rogstad, D. H. 1975, A&A, 43, 159

Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration, Akiyama, K.,

Alberdi, A., et al. 2019a, ApJL, 875, L1,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0ec7

—. 2019b, ApJL, 875, L2, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0c96
—. 2019c, ApJL, 875, L3, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0c57
—. 2019d, ApJL, 875, L4, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0e85
—. 2019e, ApJL, 875, L5, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0f43
—. 2019f, ApJL, 875, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab1141

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

17

—. 2021a, ApJL, 875, L7
—. 2021b, ApJL, 875, L8
—. 2022a, ApJL, 875, 2
—. 2022b, ApJL, 875, 3
—. 2022c, ApJL, 875, 4
—. 2022d, ApJL, 875, 5
—. 2022e, ApJL, 875, 6
Fabian, A. C. 2012, ARA&A, 50, 455,

doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081811-125521

Falcke, H., Goss, W. M., Matsuo, H., et al. 1998, ApJ, 499,

731, doi: 10.1086/305687

Falcke, H., Mannheim, K., & Biermann, P. L. 1993, A&A,

278, L1. https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9308031

Falcke, H., Melia, F., & Agol, E. 2000, ApJL, 528, L13,

doi: 10.1086/312423

Farah, J. R., et al. 2022, in prep., 00, 0, doi: TBD
Fish, V. L., Doeleman, S. S., Beaudoin, C., et al. 2011,
ApJL, 727, L36, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/727/2/L36

Gammie, C. F., McKinney, J. C., & Tóth, G. 2003, ApJ,

589, 444, doi: 10.1086/374594

García, A., Galtsov, D., & Kechkin, O. 1995, PhRvL, 74,

1276, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.74.1276

Genzel, R., Schödel, R., Ott, T., et al. 2003, Nature, 425,

934, doi: 10.1038/nature02065

Georgiev, B., et al. 2022, in prep., 00, 0, doi: TBD
Ghez, A. M., Duchêne, G., Matthews, K., et al. 2003,

ApJL, 586, L127, doi: 10.1086/374804

Ghez, A. M., Salim, S., Weinberg, N. N., et al. 2008, ApJ,

689, 1044, doi: 10.1086/592738

Gillessen, S., Eisenhauer, F., Fritz, T. K., et al. 2009,

ApJL, 707, L114, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/707/2/L114
Goldwurm, A., Cordier, B., Paul, J., et al. 1994, Nature,

371, 589, doi: 10.1038/371589a0

Gravity Collaboration, Abuter, R., Amorim, A., et al.

2018a, A&A, 615, L15,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833718

—. 2018b, A&A, 618, L10,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834294

—. 2019, A&A, 625, L10,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935656

Gravity Collaboration, Abuter, R., Aimar, N., et al. 2022,

A&A, 657, L12, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142465

Hilbert, D. 1917, Nachrichten von der Königlichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen -
Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse (Berlin:
Weidmannsche Buchhandlung), 53–76

Ho, L. C. 1999, ApJ, 516, 672, doi: 10.1086/307137
Janssen, M., Goddi, C., van Bemmel, I. M., et al. 2019,

A&A, 626, A75, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935181

Jaroszynski, M., & Kurpiewski, A. 1997, A&A, 326, 419.

https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9705044

Johannsen, T., & Psaltis, D. 2011, PhRvD, 83, 124015,

doi: 10.1103/PhysRevD.83.124015

Johnson, M. D., Fish, V. L., Doeleman, S. S., et al. 2015,

Science, 350, 1242, doi: 10.1126/science.aac7087

Johnson, M. D., Narayan, R., Psaltis, D., et al. 2018, ApJ,

865, 104. https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.08966

Joshi, P. S., Malafarina, D., & Narayan, R. 2014, Classical

and Quantum Gravity, 31, 015002,
doi: 10.1088/0264-9381/31/1/015002

Kerr, R. P. 1963, PhRvL, 11, 237,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.11.237

Kormendy, J., & Ho, L. C. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 511,

doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082708-101811

Krichbaum, T. P., Graham, D. A., Witzel, A., et al. 1998,

A&A, 335, L106

Lee, D., & Gammie, C. F. 2021, ApJ, 906, 39,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abc8f3

Liska, M., Hesp, C., Tchekhovskoy, A., et al. 2018,

MNRAS, 474, L81, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slx174

Lo, K. Y., Schilizzi, R. T., Cohen, M. H., & Ross, H. N.

1975, ApJL, 202, L63, doi: 10.1086/181982

Lo, K. Y., Shen, Z.-Q., Zhao, J.-H., & Ho, P. T. P. 1998,

ApJL, 508, L61, doi: 10.1086/311726

Lu, R.-S., Krichbaum, T. P., Roy, A. L., et al. 2018, ApJ,

859, 60, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aabe2e

Luminet, J.-P. 1979, A&A, 75, 228
Lynden-Bell, D. 1969, Nature, 223, 690,

doi: 10.1038/223690a0

Magorrian, J., Tremaine, S., Richstone, D., et al. 1998, AJ,

115, 2285, doi: 10.1086/300353

Markoff, S., Falcke, H., Yuan, F., & Biermann, P. L. 2001,

A&A, 379, L13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20011346

Marrone, D. P., Moran, J. M., Zhao, J. ., & Rao, R. 2007,

ApJ, 654, L57

Marrone, D. P., Moran, J. M., Zhao, J.-H., & Rao, R. 2006,

ApJ, 640, 308, doi: 10.1086/500106

McClintock, J. E., & Remillard, R. A. 1986, ApJ, 308, 110,

doi: 10.1086/164482

Mościbrodzka, M., Falcke, H., & Shiokawa, H. 2016, A&A,

586, A38, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201526630

Mościbrodzka, M., Gammie, C. F., Dolence, J. C.,

Shiokawa, H., & Leung, P. K. 2009, ApJ, 706, 497,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/706/1/497

Nagar, N. M., Falcke, H., Wilson, A. S., & Ho, L. C. 2000,

ApJ, 542, 186, doi: 10.1086/309524

Narayan, R., Igumenshchev, I. V., & Abramowicz, M. A.

2000, ApJ, 539, 798, doi: 10.1086/309268

—. 2003, PASJ, 55, L69, doi: 10.1093/pasj/55.6.L69

18

The EHT Collaboration et al.

Narayan, R., & McClintock, J. E. 2008, NewAR, 51, 733,

Rogers, A. E. E., Doeleman, S., Wright, M. C. H., et al.

doi: 10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002

Narayan, R., Sądowski, A., Penna, R. F., & Kulkarni, A. K.

2012, MNRAS, 426, 3241,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.22002.x

Narayan, R., Yi, I., & Mahadevan, R. 1995, Nature, 374,

623, doi: 10.1038/374623a0

Olivares, H., Younsi, Z., Fromm, C. M., et al. 2020,
MNRAS, 497, 521, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1878

Oppenheimer, J. R., & Snyder, H. 1939, Physical Review,

56, 455, doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.56.455

Özel, F., Psaltis, D., & Narayan, R. 2000, ApJ, 541, 234,

doi: 10.1086/309396

Özel, F., Psaltis, D., & Younsi, Z. 2021, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2111.01123. https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.01123

Padin, S., Woody, D. P., Hodges, M. W., et al. 1990, ApJL,

360, L11, doi: 10.1086/185800
Penrose, R. 1965, PhRvL, 14, 57,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57

Predehl, P., & Truemper, J. 1994, A&A, 290, L29
Psaltis, D., Johnson, M., Narayan, R., et al. 2018, ArXiv

e-prints. https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.01242

Psaltis, D., Medeiros, L., Christian, P., et al. 2020, PhRvL,

125, 141104, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.141104

Quataert, E. 2002, ApJ, 575, 855, doi: 10.1086/341425
Quataert, E., & Gruzinov, A. 2000a, ApJ, 539, 809,

doi: 10.1086/309267

—. 2000b, ApJ, 545, 842, doi: 10.1086/317845
Reid, M. J., & Brunthaler, A. 2020, ApJ, 892, 39,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab76cd

Reid, M. J., Menten, K. M., Brunthaler, A., et al. 2019,

ApJ, 885, 131, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4a11

Ressler, S. M., White, C. J., Quataert, E., & Stone, J. M.

2020, ApJL, 896, L6, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab9532

Richstone, D., Ajhar, E. A., Bender, R., et al. 1998, Nature,

385, A14. https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9810378

1994, ApJL, 434, L59, doi: 10.1086/187574

Russell, C. M. P., Wang, Q. D., & Cuadra, J. 2017,
MNRAS, 464, 4958, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2584

Satapathy, K., Psaltis, D., Özel, F., et al. 2022, ApJ, 925,

13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac332e
Schmidt, M. 1963, Nature, 197, 1040,

doi: 10.1038/1971040a0

Schödel, R., Ott, T., Genzel, R., et al. 2002, Nature, 419,

694, doi: 10.1038/nature01121

Schwarzschild, K. 1916, Abh. Konigl. Preuss. Akad.

Wissenschaften Jahre 1906,92, Berlin,1907, 1916, 189

Shaikh, R., Kocherlakota, P., Narayan, R., & Joshi, P. S.

2019, MNRAS, 482, 52, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2624

Shen, Z.-Q., Lo, K. Y., Liang, M.-C., Ho, P. T. P., & Zhao,

J.-H. 2005, Nature, 438, 62, doi: 10.1038/nature04205
Thompson, A. R., Moran, J. M., & Swenson, Jr., G. W.

2017, Interferometry and Synthesis in Radio Astronomy,
3rd Edition (Springer International Publishing),
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-44431-4

Wang, Q. D., Nowak, M. A., Markoff, S. B., et al. 2013,

Science, 341, 981, doi: 10.1126/science.1240755

Webster, B. L., & Murdin, P. 1972, Nature, 235, 37,

doi: 10.1038/235037a0

White, C. J., & Quataert, E. 2022, ApJ, 926, 136,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac423c

Wielgus, M., Marchili, N., Martí-Vidal, I., et al. 2022, in

prep., 00, 0, doi: TBD

Younsi, Z., Psaltis, D., & Özel, F. 2021, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2111.01752. https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.01752

Yuan, F., & Narayan, R. 2014, ARA&A, 52, 529,

doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082812-141003

Zylka, R., Mezger, P. G., & Lesch, H. 1992, A&A, 261, 119

All Authors and Affiliations

Kazunori Akiyama ,1, 2, 3 Antxon Alberdi

,4 Walter Alef,5

Juan Carlos Algaba ,6

Richard Anantua ,3, 7, 8 Keiichi Asada ,9 Rebecca Azulay ,10, 11, 5 Uwe Bach ,5

Anne-Kathrin Baczko ,5 David Ball,12 Mislav Baloković

,13

John Barrett

,1 Michi Bauböck ,14

Bradford A. Benson ,15, 16 Dan Bintley,17, 18 Lindy Blackburn ,3, 7 Raymond Blundell
Katherine L. Bouman ,19 Geoffrey C. Bower

,7
,22, 23 Michael Bremer,24

,20, 21 Hope Boyce

Christiaan D. Brinkerink ,25 Roger Brissenden ,3, 7 Silke Britzen ,5 Avery E. Broderick ,26, 27, 28

Dominique Broguiere

,24 Thomas Bronzwaer

,25 Sandra Bustamante

,29 Do-Young Byun ,30, 31

John E. Carlstrom ,32, 16, 33, 34 Chiara Ceccobello ,35 Andrew Chael
Koushik Chatterjee

,3, 7 Shami Chatterjee

,40 Ming-Tang Chen ,20 Yongjun Chen (陈永军 )

,36, 37 Chi-kwan Chan ,12, 38, 39
,41, 42

Xiaopeng Cheng ,30

Ilje Cho ,4 Pierre Christian ,43 Nicholas S. Conroy ,44, 7

John E. Conway ,35

James M. Cordes

,40 Thomas M. Crawford ,16, 32 Geoffrey B. Crew ,1

Alejandro Cruz-Osorio ,45 Yuzhu Cui (崔玉竹 )
,51, 45, 52 Roger Deane
Mariafelicia De Laurentis

,46, 47, 48
,53, 54, 55

,49, 50, 25
Jordy Davelaar
Jessica Dempsey ,17, 18, 56

Gregory Desvignes

,5, 57

Sean Dougal

,12 Sergio A. Dzib

Jason Dexter

,24, 5 Ralph P. Eatough ,59, 5 Razieh Emami

,58 Vedant Dhruv ,14 Sheperd S. Doeleman ,3, 7
,7 Heino Falcke

,25

Joseph Farah ,60, 61 Vincent L. Fish ,1 Ed Fomalont

,62 H. Alyson Ford ,12

Raquel Fraga-Encinas

,25 William T. Freeman,63, 64 Per Friberg ,17, 18 Christian M. Fromm ,65, 45, 5

Antonio Fuentes

Olivier Gentaz

,4 Peter Galison ,3, 66, 67 Charles F. Gammie
,24 Boris Georgiev ,27, 28, 26 Ciriaco Goddi

Arturo I. Gómez-Ruiz

,72, 73

José L. Gómez

,4 Minfeng Gu (顾敏峰 )

,14, 44, 68 Roberto García ,24
,69, 70 Roman Gold ,71, 45
,41, 74 Mark Gurwell

,7

Kazuhiro Hada ,47, 48 Daryl Haggard ,22, 23 Kari Haworth,7 Michael H. Hecht
Ronald Hesper

,75 Dirk Heumann ,12 Luis C. Ho (何子山 )
Mareki Honma ,47, 48, 78 Chih-Wei L. Huang ,9 Lei Huang (黄磊 )

,1
,76, 77 Paul Ho ,9, 18
,41, 74 David H. Hughes,72

Shiro Ikeda ,2, 79, 80, 81 C. M. Violette Impellizzeri

,82, 62 Makoto Inoue

,9 Sara Issaoun ,7, 37

David J. James

,83 Buell T. Jannuzi

,12 Michael Janssen ,5 Britton Jeter

,9

Wu Jiang (江悟 )

,41 Alejandra Jiménez-Rosales

,25 Michael D. Johnson ,3, 7 Svetlana Jorstad ,84

Abhishek V. Joshi

,14 Taehyun Jung ,30, 31 Mansour Karami

,26, 27 Ramesh Karuppusamy ,5

Tomohisa Kawashima ,85 Garrett K. Keating ,7 Mark Kettenis

,86 Dong-Jin Kim ,5

Jae-Young Kim ,87, 30, 5

Jongsoo Kim ,30

Junhan Kim ,12, 19 Motoki Kino ,2, 88

Jun Yi Koay ,9

Prashant Kocherlakota ,45 Yutaro Kofuji,47, 78 Patrick M. Koch ,9 Shoko Koyama ,89, 9
,5 Thomas P. Krichbaum ,5 Cheng-Yu Kuo ,90, 9
Carsten Kramer

,24 Michael Kramer

Noemi La Bella ,25 Tod R. Lauer

,91 Daeyoung Lee

,14 Sang-Sung Lee

,30 Po Kin Leung ,92

Aviad Levis

,19 Zhiyuan Li (李志远 )

,93, 94 Rocco Lico ,4, 95 Greg Lindahl

,7

Michael Lindqvist

,35 Mikhail Lisakov ,5

Jun Liu (刘俊 )

,5 Kuo Liu ,5 Elisabetta Liuzzo ,96

Wen-Ping Lo ,9, 97 Andrei P. Lobanov ,5 Laurent Loinard ,98, 99 Colin J. Lonsdale
,96, 5
Iván Martí-Vidal

,100, 101, 102 Nicola Marchili

Jirong Mao (毛基荣 )

Ru-Sen Lu (路如森 )

,41, 42, 5

,84

Sera Markoff

,103, 104 Daniel P. Marrone
Satoki Matsushita ,9 Lynn D. Matthews

,12 Alan P. Marscher
,1 Lia Medeiros

,105, 106, 12 Karl M. Menten ,5

,1

,10, 11

Daniel Michalik ,107, 16

Izumi Mizuno ,17, 18 Yosuke Mizuno ,46, 108, 45

James M. Moran ,3, 7

Kotaro Moriyama ,45, 1, 47 Monika Moscibrodzka ,25 Cornelia Müller

Gibwa Musoke

,103, 25

Ioannis Myserlis

,109 Andrew Nadolski

,5, 25 Alejandro Mus
,2, 48

,44 Hiroshi Nagai

,10, 11

Neil M. Nagar

,110 Masanori Nakamura ,111, 9 Ramesh Narayan ,3, 7 Gopal Narayanan ,29

Iniyan Natarajan ,53, 112 Antonios Nathanail,45, 113 Santiago Navarro Fuentes,109

Joey Neilsen ,114

Roberto Neri
Junghwan Oh ,116 Hiroki Okino ,47, 78 Héctor Olivares

,27, 28, 26 Aristeidis Noutsos

,5 Michael A. Nowak ,115
,25 Gisela N. Ortiz-León ,99, 5
,12 Daniel C. M. Palumbo ,3, 7 Georgios Filippos Paraschos

Tomoaki Oyama ,47 Feryal Özel

,24 Chunchong Ni

,5

Jongho Park ,9, 117 Harriet Parsons

,17, 18 Nimesh Patel

,7 Ue-Li Pen ,9, 26, 118, 119, 120

Dominic W. Pesce
Oliver Porth ,103, 45 Felix M. Pötzl

,7, 3 Vincent Piétu,24 Richard Plambeck ,121 Aleksandar PopStefanija,29
,26

Jorge A. Preciado-López
,12 Hung-Yi Pu ,123, 124, 9 Venkatessh Ramakrishnan ,110, 125, 126

,122, 5 Ben Prather

Dimitrios Psaltis

,14

Ramprasad Rao ,7 Mark G. Rawlings

,127, 17, 18 Alexander W. Raymond ,3, 7

Luciano Rezzolla ,45, 128, 129 Angelo Ricarte

Alan Rogers

,1 Eduardo Ros

,5 Cristina Romero-Cañizales

,7, 3 Bart Ripperda ,130, 50 Freek Roelofs
,9 Arash Roshanineshat

,7, 3, 25
,12

20

The EHT Collaboration et al.

Helge Rottmann,5 Alan L. Roy ,5

Ignacio Ruiz

Salvador Sánchez

,109 David Sánchez-Argüelles

,109 Chet Ruszczyk ,1 Kazi L. J. Rygl
,109

,72, 73 Miguel Sánchez-Portal

,96

Mahito Sasada ,131, 47, 132 Kaushik Satapathy ,12 Tuomas Savolainen ,133, 126, 5 F. Peter Schloerb,29

Jonathan Schonfeld ,7 Karl-Friedrich Schuster

,24 Lijing Shao ,77, 5

Zhiqiang Shen (沈志强 )

,41, 42 Des Small

,86 Bong Won Sohn ,17, 18, 30, 31, 134

Jason SooHoo ,1

Kamal Souccar

,29 He Sun (孙赫 )

,19 Fumie Tazaki

,47 Alexandra J. Tetarenko ,135, 37

Paul Tiede

,7, 3 Remo P. J. Tilanus

,12, 25, 82, 136 Michael Titus

,1 Pablo Torne

,109, 5

Efthalia Traianou ,4, 5 Tyler Trent,12 Sascha Trippe

,137 Matthew Turk ,44

Ilse van Bemmel
Jan Wagner

,86 Huib Jan van Langevelde
,5 Derek Ward-Thompson ,139

Norbert Wex ,5 Robert Wharton ,5 Maciek Wielgus

,86, 82, 138 Daniel R. van Rossum ,25

Jesse Vos
,3, 7
,5 Kaj Wiik ,141 Gunther Witzel

Jonathan Weintroub

,140

John Wardle

,25

,5

Michael F. Wondrak ,25, 142 George N. Wong ,106, 143 Qingwen Wu (吴庆文 )

,144

Paul Yamaguchi
Feng Yuan (袁峰 )

,7 Doosoo Yoon ,103 André Young ,25 Ken Young ,7 Ziri Younsi
,41, 74, 146 Ye-Fei Yuan (袁业飞 )

J. Anton Zensus

,17, 18, 147

,5 Shuo Zhang ,148

,145, 45

Guang-Yao Zhao 4 And Shan-Shan Zhao (赵杉杉 )
The Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration

41

Claudio Agurto,149 Alexander Allardi,150 Rodrigo Amestica,151
Oriel Arriagada,149

Juan Pablo Araneda,149
,152 Alessandra Bertarini,5, 153 Ryan Berthold,17

Jennie L. Berghuis

Jay Blanchard ,154 Ken Brown,17 Mauricio Cárdenas,149 Michael Cantzler,149 Patricio Caro,149
Edgar Castillo-Domínguez,73, 155 Tin Lok Chan ,92 Chih-Cheng Chang,156, 9 Dominic O. Chang,3, 7

Shu-Hao Chang,9 Song-Chu Chang,156 Chung-Chen Chen,9 Ryan Chilson,20 Tim C. Chuter,17
Miroslaw Ciechanowicz,5, 149 Edgar Colin-Beltran,72, 73
Joseph Crowley,1
,157
Nathalie Degenaar

,103 Sven Dornbusch,5 Carlos A. Durán ,149 Wendeline B. Everett

Iain M. Coulson ,17

Aaron Faber,158 Karl Forster

,159 Miriam M. Fuchs,160 David M. Gale,72 Gertie Geertsema,161

Edouard González,149 Dave Graham,5 Frédéric Gueth,24 Nils W. Halverson ,162 Chih-Chiang Han,9

Kuo-Chang Han,156 Yutaka Hasegawa,163

José Luis Hernández-Rebollar,72 Cristian Herrera,149

Ruben Herrero-Illana ,164 Stefan Heyminck,5 Akihiko Hirota ,164, 2

James Hoge,17

Shelbi R. Hostler Schimpf,7 Ryan E. Howie

,165 Yau-De Huang,9 Homin Jiang,9 Hao Jinchi,156

David John,109 Kimihiro Kimura,163 Thomas Klein,149 Derek Kubo,20

John Kuroda,17

Caleb Kwon ,114 Richard Lacasse,151 Robert Laing ,166, 167 Erik M. Leitch ,32 Chao-Te Li,9
Ching-Tang Liu,9 Kuan-Yu Liu,9, 17 Lupin C.-C. Lin ,168 Li-Ming Lu,156 Felipe Mac-Auliffe,149

Pierre Martin-Cocher,9 Callie Matulonis,17

,7 Hugo Messias
Zheng Meyer-Zhao,56 Alfredo Montaña,72, 73 Francisco Montenegro-Montes

John K. Maute

,164, 149
,149

William Montgomerie,17, 169 Marcos Emir Moreno Nolasco,170 Dirk Muders
,5 Hiroaki Nishioka,9
Timothy J. Norton,7 George Nystrom,20 Hideo Ogawa,163 Rodrigo Olivares,149 Peter Oshiro,20
,1
Juan Pablo Pérez-Beaupuits

,149, 5, 171 Rodrigo Parra,149 Neil M. Phillips,167 Michael Poirier
Nicolas Pradel,9 Richard Qiu ,172, 173 Philippe A. Raffin,20 Alexandra S. Rahlin ,32, 15
Jorge Ramírez,149 Sean Ressler
Iván Rodríguez-Montoya,72, 73
Jorge Santana,149 Paul Shaw,9 Leslie E. Shirkey Jr.,7
Alejandro F. Saez-Madain ,164, 151

,174 Mark Reynolds

,175

Kevin M. Silva,17 William Snow,20 Don Sousa ,1 T.K. Sridharan,7 William Stahm,17

Anthony A. Stark ,7

John Test,7 Karl Torstensson,149 Paulina Venegas,149 Craig Walther,17

Ta-Shun Wei,9 Chris White

,130 Gundolf Wieching,5 Rudy Wijnands

,103

Jan G. A. Wouterloot

,17 Chen-Yu Yu,9 Wei Yu ,7 Milagros Zeballos,72, 176

1Massachusetts Institute of Technology Haystack Observatory, 99 Millstone Road, Westford, MA 01886, USA

2National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan
3Black Hole Initiative at Harvard University, 20 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

4Instituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía-CSIC, Glorieta de la Astronomía s/n, E-18008 Granada, Spain

5Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie, Auf dem Hügel 69, D-53121 Bonn, Germany

6Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Universiti Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
7Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

8Department of Physics & Astronomy, The University of Texas at San Antonio, One UTSA Circle, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA

9Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica, 11F of Astronomy-Mathematics Building, AS/NTU No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt

Rd, Taipei 10617, Taiwan, R.O.C.

10Departament d’Astronomia i Astrofísica, Universitat de València, C. Dr. Moliner 50, E-46100 Burjassot, València, Spain

11Observatori Astronòmic, Universitat de València, C. Catedrático José Beltrán 2, E-46980 Paterna, València, Spain

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

21

12Steward Observatory and Department of Astronomy, University of Arizona, 933 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

13Yale Center for Astronomy & Astrophysics, Yale University, 52 Hillhouse Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA

14Department of Physics, University of Illinois, 1110 West Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

15Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, MS209, P.O. Box 500, Batavia, IL 60510, USA

16Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago, 5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

17East Asian Observatory, 660 N. A’ohoku Place, Hilo, HI 96720, USA

18James Clerk Maxwell Telescope (JCMT), 660 N. A’ohoku Place, Hilo, HI 96720, USA

19California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

20Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica, 645 N. A’ohoku Place, Hilo, HI 96720, USA

21Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 2505 Correa Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA

22Department of Physics, McGill University, 3600 rue University, Montréal, QC H3A 2T8, Canada
23McGill Space Institute, McGill University, 3550 rue University, Montréal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada

24Institut de Radioastronomie Millimétrique (IRAM), 300 rue de la Piscine, F-38406 Saint Martin d’Hères, France

25Department of Astrophysics, Institute for Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics (IMAPP), Radboud University, P.O. Box

9010, 6500 GL Nijmegen, The Netherlands

26Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, 31 Caroline Street North, Waterloo, ON, N2L 2Y5, Canada

27Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada

28Waterloo Centre for Astrophysics, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada

29Department of Astronomy, University of Massachusetts, 01003, Amherst, MA, USA

30Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daedeok-daero 776, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea

31University of Science and Technology, Gajeong-ro 217, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea

32Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, University of Chicago, 5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

33Department of Physics, University of Chicago, 5720 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
34Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, 5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

35Department of Space, Earth and Environment, Chalmers University of Technology, Onsala Space Observatory, SE-43992 Onsala,

Sweden

36Princeton Center for Theoretical Science, Jadwin Hall, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

37NASA Hubble Fellowship Program, Einstein Fellow

38Data Science Institute, University of Arizona, 1230 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
39Program in Applied Mathematics, University of Arizona, 617 N. Santa Rita, Tucson, AZ 85721

40Cornell Center for Astrophysics and Planetary Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA

41Shanghai Astronomical Observatory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 80 Nandan Road, Shanghai 200030, People’s Republic of China

42Key Laboratory of Radio Astronomy, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing 210008, People’s Republic of China

43Physics Department, Fairfield University, 1073 North Benson Road, Fairfield, CT 06824, USA

44Department of Astronomy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1002 West Green Street, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

45Institut für Theoretische Physik, Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Straße 1, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
46Tsung-Dao Lee Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shengrong Road 520, Shanghai, 201210, People’s Republic of China

47Mizusawa VLBI Observatory, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-12 Hoshigaoka, Mizusawa, Oshu, Iwate 023-0861, Japan

48Department of Astronomical Science, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo

49Department of Astronomy and Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory, Columbia University, 550 W 120th Street, New York, NY 10027,

50Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA

51Dipartimento di Fisica “E. Pancini”, Universitá di Napoli “Federico II”, Compl. Univ. di Monte S. Angelo, Edificio G, Via Cinthia,

52INFN Sez. di Napoli, Compl. Univ. di Monte S. Angelo, Edificio G, Via Cinthia, I-80126, Napoli, Italy

53Wits Centre for Astrophysics, University of the Witwatersrand, 1 Jan Smuts Avenue, Braamfontein, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa

54Department of Physics, University of Pretoria, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, South Africa

55Centre for Radio Astronomy Techniques and Technologies, Department of Physics and Electronics, Rhodes University, Makhanda 6140,

57LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, 5 place Jules Janssen, 92195

56ASTRON, Oude Hoogeveensedijk 4, 7991 PD Dwingeloo, The Netherlands

58JILA and Department of Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

59National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 20A Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, PR China

60Las Cumbres Observatory, 6740 Cortona Drive, Suite 102, Goleta, CA 93117-5575, USA
61Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9530, USA

62National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 520 Edgemont Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA

181-8588, Japan

USA

I-80126, Napoli, Italy

South Africa

Meudon, France

22

The EHT Collaboration et al.

63Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 32-D476, 77 Massachusetts Ave.,

Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

64Google Research, 355 Main St., Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

65Institut für Theoretische Physik und Astrophysik, Universität Würzburg, Emil-Fischer-Str. 31, 97074 Würzburg, Germany

66Department of History of Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

67Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
68NCSA, University of Illinois, 1205 W Clark St, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

69Dipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, SP Monserrato-Sestu km 0.7, I-09042 Monserrato, Italy

70INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Cagliari, Via della Scienza 5, 09047, Selargius, CA, Italy
71CP3-Origins, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark

72Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y Electrónica. Apartado Postal 51 y 216, 72000. Puebla Pue., México

73Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologìa, Av. Insurgentes Sur 1582, 03940, Ciudad de México, México

74Key Laboratory for Research in Galaxies and Cosmology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200030, People’s Republic of China
75NOVA Sub-mm Instrumentation Group, Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, Landleven 12, 9747 AD Groningen,

76Department of Astronomy, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China
77Kavli Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China

78Department of Astronomy, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

79The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 10-3 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo, 190-8562, Japan

80Department of Statistical Science, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), 10-3 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo

81Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, 277-8583,

The Netherlands

190-8562, Japan

Japan

82Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, Postbus 2300, 9513 RA Leiden, The Netherlands

83ASTRAVEO LLC, PO Box 1668, Gloucester, MA 01931

84Institute for Astrophysical Research, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Ave., Boston, MA 02215, USA

85Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8582, Japan

86Joint Institute for VLBI ERIC (JIVE), Oude Hoogeveensedijk 4, 7991 PD Dwingeloo, The Netherlands

87Department of Astronomy and Atmospheric Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea

88Kogakuin University of Technology & Engineering, Academic Support Center, 2665-1 Nakano, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0015, Japan

90Physics Department, National Sun Yat-Sen University, No. 70, Lien-Hai Road, Kaosiung City 80424, Taiwan, R.O.C.

89Niigata University, 8050 Ikarashi-nino-cho, Nishi-ku, Niigata 950-2181, Japan

91National Optical Astronomy Observatory, 950 N. Cherry Ave., Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
92Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N. T., Hong Kong

93School of Astronomy and Space Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, People’s Republic of China

94Key Laboratory of Modern Astronomy and Astrophysics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, People’s Republic of China

95INAF-Istituto di Radioastronomia, Via P. Gobetti 101, I-40129 Bologna, Italy

96INAF-Istituto di Radioastronomia & Italian ALMA Regional Centre, Via P. Gobetti 101, I-40129 Bologna, Italy
97Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, No.1, Sect.4, Roosevelt Rd., Taipei 10617, Taiwan, R.O.C
98Instituto de Radioastronomía y Astrofísica, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Morelia 58089, México

99Instituto de Astronomía, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Apdo Postal 70-264, Ciudad de México, México

100Yunnan Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 650011 Kunming, Yunnan Province, People’s Republic of China

101Center for Astronomical Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 20A Datun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100012, People’s

102Key Laboratory for the Structure and Evolution of Celestial Objects, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 650011 Kunming, People’s

103Anton Pannekoek Institute for Astronomy, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
104Gravitation and Astroparticle Physics Amsterdam (GRAPPA) Institute, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH

Republic of China

Republic of China

Amsterdam, The Netherlands

105NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellow

106School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study, 1 Einstein Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

107Science Support Office, Directorate of Science, European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESA/ESTEC), Keplerlaan 1, 2201

AZ Noordwijk, The Netherlands

108School of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, People’s Republic of China

109Institut de Radioastronomie Millimétrique (IRAM), Avenida Divina Pastora 7, Local 20, E-18012, Granada, Spain

110Astronomy Department, Universidad de Concepción, Casilla 160-C, Concepción, Chile

111National Institute of Technology, Hachinohe College, 16-1 Uwanotai, Tamonoki, Hachinohe City, Aomori 039-1192, Japan

112South African Radio Astronomy Observatory, Observatory 7925, Cape Town, South Africa

The Shadow of the Supermassive Black Hole in the Center of the Milky Way

23

113Department of Physics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, GR 15783 Zografos, Greece

114Department of Physics, Villanova University, 800 Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, PA 19085, USA

115Physics Department, Washington University CB 1105, St Louis, MO 63130, USA

116Sejong University, 209 Neungdong-ro, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

117EACOA Fellow

118Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 60 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H8, Canada
119Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St. George Street, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H4, Canada

120Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, 180 Dundas St West, Toronto, ON, M5G 1Z8, Canada

121Radio Astronomy Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

122Department of Physics, University College Cork, Kane Building, College Road, Cork T12 K8AF, Ireland

123Department of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University, No. 88, Sec.4, Tingzhou Rd., Taipei 116, Taiwan, R.O.C.

124Center of Astronomy and Gravitation, National Taiwan Normal University, No. 88, Sec. 4, Tingzhou Road, Taipei 116, Taiwan,

R.O.C.

125Finnish Centre for Astronomy with ESO, FI-20014 University of Turku, Finland

126Aalto University Metsähovi Radio Observatory, Metsähovintie 114, FI-02540 Kylmälä, Finland

127Gemini Observatory/NSF NOIRLab, 670 N. A’oh¯ok¯u Place, Hilo, HI 96720, USA

128Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, Ruth-Moufang-Strasse 1, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany

129School of Mathematics, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland

130Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Peyton Hall, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

131Department of Physics, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8551, Japan

132Hiroshima Astrophysical Science Center, Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan

133Aalto University Department of Electronics and Nanoengineering, PL 15500, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland

134Department of Astronomy, Yonsei University, Yonsei-ro 50, Seodaemun-gu, 03722 Seoul, Republic of Korea

135Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409-1051, USA

136Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), Postbus 93138, 2509 AC Den Haag, The Netherlands
137Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea

138University of New Mexico, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA

139Jeremiah Horrocks Institute, University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, UK
140Physics Department, Brandeis University, 415 South Street, Waltham, MA 02453, USA
141Tuorla Observatory, Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Turku, Finland

142Radboud Excellence Fellow of Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

143Princeton Gravity Initiative, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA

144School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430074, People’s Republic of China
145Mullard Space Science Laboratory, University College London, Holmbury St. Mary, Dorking, Surrey, RH5 6NT, UK

146School of Astronomy and Space Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Beijing 100049,

People’s Republic of China

147Astronomy Department, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, People’s Republic of China

149European Southern Observatory, Alonso de Córdova 3107, Vitacura, Casilla 19001, Santiago de Chile, Chile

148Bard College, 30 Campus Road, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY, 12504

150University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, U.S.A.

151National Radio Astronomy Observatory, NRAO Technology Center, 1180 Boxwood Estate Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA

152Gemini Observatory, 670 N. A’ohoku Place, Hilo, Hawaii, 96720, USA

153Institute of Geodesy and Geoinformation, University of Bonn, D-53113 Bonn, Germany

154National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Socorro, NM 87801, USA

155SRON-Netherlands Institute for Space Research, Landleven 12, 9747 AD Groningen, Netherlands

156National Chung-Shan Institute of Science and Technology, No.566, Ln. 134, Longyuan Rd., Longtan Dist., Taoyuan City 325, Taiwan,

R.O.C.

157CASA, Department of Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

158Western University, 1151 Richmond Street, London, Ontario, N6A 3K7, Canada

159Space Radiation Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA

160Drexel University, 3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia PA 19104

161Research and Development Weather and Climate Models, Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute, Utrechtseweg 297, 3731 GA, De

Bilt, The Netherlands

162Department of Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences and Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

163Osaka Prefecture University, Gakuencyou Sakai Osaka, Sakai 599-8531, Kinki, Japan

164Joint ALMA Observatory, Alonso de Córdova 3107, Vitacura 763-0355, Santiago de Chile, Chile

165MMT Observatory, P.O. Box 210065, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA

24

The EHT Collaboration et al.

166SKA Observatory, Jodrell Bank, Lower Withington, Macclesfield SK11 9FT

167European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild-Strasse 2, D-85478 Garching, Germany
168Department of Physics, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701401, Taiwan, R.O.C.

169SOFIA Science Center, Universities Space Research Association, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
170Coorporación Mexicana de Investigación en Materiales S.A. de C.V., Ciencia y Tecnología 790, Colonia Saltillo 400, Saltillo,

Coahuila, C.P. 25290, Mexico

171Centro de Astro-Ingeniería (AIUC), Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackena 4860, Macul, Santiago, Chile

172Department of Physics, Harvard University, 17 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

173John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, 29 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA,

174Kavli Institute For Theoretical Physics, 2411 Kohn Hall, Santa Barbara, CA 93111 USA

175Department of Astronomy, University of Michigan, 1085 South University Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
176Universidad de las Américas Puebla, Sta. Catarina Mártir S/N, San Andrés Cholula, Puebla, C.P. 72810, Mexico

