 

1 

Jean-Pierre Petit to  Sabine Hossenfelder    2025 – 03 – 10  
 
Dear Sabine, 
 
 I am contacting you again to discuss bimetric approaches to gravitation and, more 
specifically, your work from 2008 (Physical Review D78), which strongly influenced me in 
the development of the Janus model. It is undeniable that your bimetric approach with 
exchange symmetry constituted a solid basis for the formulation of a framework established 
with two metrics.  
 
At the time, our discussions did not lead to a joint work, but I think that it would be relevant 
today to revisit this question, particularly in light of recent advances and astrophysical 
observations, related to the central supermassive objects M87* and SgrA*. 
 
You will find attached our article, published in The European Physical Journal C(2024) where 
I explain in detail the Janus model and its implications, particularly in cosmology and 
relativistic astrophysics (arXiv gr-qc 2412.04644) 
 
My analysis shows that if, in your work, you had introduced two "equal and opposite Einstein 
constants" (instead of taking them equal, as you explicitly did) you would have obtained a 
model very close to the Janus model, with its force laws reconstituting the principles of 
action-reaction.  
 
Your construction from an action is more precise than mine (which is more of a tinkering than 
anything else). Your functional relationship is to be explored and the conjecture that it can 
lead to a fundamental link between "conjugate" metrics belonging to the functional space of 
hyperbolic Riemannian metrics. 
 
The equivalence principle is simply translated, in my opinion, geometrically, by the fact that 
the two hypersurfaces have Minkowski space as a "tangent plane" (the story of the elevator a 
free fall, by Einstein). You were also the first to construct your action on the basis of the 
elementary hypervolumes of the two space-times.  
 
This conceptual proximity underlines the importance of your initial contribution and opens 
the possibility of a productive scientific dialogue. Far from wanting to claim any exclusivity 
on these developments, I will be happy to discuss a possible collaboration and a perspective 
of our respective works.  
 
It seems to me that the time has come to gather ideas and explore together the consequences 
of this bimetric approach, which could offer answers to the current crisis in cosmology, 
astrophysics and physics.  
 
As you point out in your videos, things are going very badly. I don’t know if you know this, 
but my collaborator, the Belgian mathematician Nathalie Debergh, has produced several 
articles representing the quantum mechanics side of Janus, simply by showing that a linear 
and unitary time reversal operator naturally generated negative energy states. Since the 
probability of existence is E/m, we obtain a positive probability if m is also negative. But you 
would be much better able to discuss this with her, whom I am also copying. 
 
It is "physics west of the Pecos". 

 

2 

 
If there is one person with whom I have always wanted to collaborate, it is you and I would be 
happy to co-sign an article with you. 
 
Sincerely yours  
 
Jean-Pierre Petit.  
 
PS: for years I have made sure that my name is no longer linked to this UFO subject, a 
harmful and totally counterproductive approach. Taking this path was a major mistake. 
 

